I should like to thank Keele University for granting me a semester's 
sabbatical leave to complete this project, and my colleagues in the Depart/ 
ment of English Language and Literature for covering for me in my 
absence. Special thanks to James McLaverty and Anthea Trodd, who, with 
heavy workloads to manage, generously read and commented on portions of 
the manuscript with characteristic acumen. I am indebted to Stuart Sim, 
first, for inviting me to embark on the project; and, secondly, for his efficiency 
and supportiveness in reading and commenting on the entire manuscript. 
Thanks also to David Walker for the loan of books and conversations about 
the novel. The anonymous readers appointed by Edinburgh University 
Press provided me with encouragement and constructive criticism at a help/ 
ful stage: I thank them. It has been a real pleasure to work again under the 
ever/considerate guidance of Jackie Jones. Above all, thanks to K, to whom 
the book is dedicated. 



01 pages i-xii 29/1/03 17:21 Page 




Preface: the scope of the book and how to read it 



This book introduces students to the novel and prose narrative. For the 
most part, it works with case/study readings of novels which are, in my 
experience, widely and frequently taught. They are: Jane Austen's Emma; 
Samuel Richardson's Pamela; Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre; George Eliot's 
Mill on the Floss; Charles Dickens's Bleak House; Henry James's The Spoils 
of Poynton; H.G. Wells's Ann Veronica; Virginia Woolf's Mrs Dalloway; and 
Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children. In other words, they are a selection 
of fictions dating from 1740 to 1980, which are explored in more or less 
chronological succession to illustrate the ways in which the narrative 
strategies of the novel have been subject to both change and continuity over 
the course of two and a half centuries, from the origins of the English novel 
in the eighteenth century to the postmodern and postcolonial novel in the late 
twentieth. In being considered in the final chapter and alongside Midnight's 
Children (1980), Laurence Sterne's eighteenth/century novel Tristram Shandy 
finds itself somewhat out of line: but readers who know anything about 
Sterne's wonderfully anti'linear novel will not be surprised at this. Moreover, 
the anti'linear nature of Sterne's narrative encourages a revised approach to 
the story of the novel in literary history. Generally, each novel is accorded 
its own itemised section (or sections) within a chapter. I have sought to use 
editions which are readily available. 

In Chapter 4 I also demonstrate ways of reading two different kinds 
of short story from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, an 
important transitional period in the history of fiction during which the short 
story became a genre acknowledged in its own right: the stories are Thomas 
Hardy's 'The Withered Arm' and Katherine Mansfield's 'The Garden 
Party'. 

In being concerned with prose narrative as well as the novel, the book 



01 pages i-xii 29/1/03 17:21 Page 



e 



Preface xi 

offers ways of reading non/fictional narratives which are coming to figure 
increasingly in students' programmes as the nature of literary studies itself 
changes. In Chapter 3 I explore ways of reading a nineteenth/century 
autobiography, Samuel Bamford's Early Days, and a nineteenth/century 
biography, Elizabeth Gaskell's The Life of Charlotte Bronte. In selecting these 
narratives, I hope to show how, first, Bamford's autobiography can help 
readers to think about the relationship between writing and class (Bamford 
is generally recognised as a contributor to a tradition of working/class male 
writing). And, secondly, in the case of Elizabeth Gaskell's biography of 
Charlotte Bronte, my aim will be to show how this work can be used in 
discussions of women's writing. 

Of course, judgements are involved in making selections, and selections 
had to be made on the assumption that the average reader's principal study 
needs are still likely to be orientated towards the novel (which as a result 
remains the principal focus of the book). Consequently I should not like 
readers to assume that my readings of non/fictional prose narratives amount 
to a universal code for reading all autobiographies and biographies, different 
examples of which can be found from periods and contexts which, for 
reasons of space, I have not been able to tackle. My readings of non/fiction 
prose narratives offer broad principles to guide reading, backed up by 
examples, and are designed to act as starting points for further study. Of 
course, the same can be said for my readings of novels. Notes which follow 
the chapters point to sources for this further study, and additional infor/ 
mation is provided in the annotated select bibliography. Where material is 
available in easily accessible anthologies and readers I have endeavoured to 
cite from these (whilst seeking also to refer to the original source). 

One of the aims of this book is to provide students with a framework for 
thinking about the relationships between novels and other forms of prose 
narrative, in historical and cultural context, in the light of recent develop/ 
ments in literary studies. In addition, the book provides a basic introduction 
to recent critical positions which have had a major impact on the study 
of the novel, such as feminism, postmodernism and postcolonialism. It is 
important that a book such as this be a synthesis of established positions, 
and, within the bounds of accessibility, as up to date as it can be. As a conse/ 
quence, it has been necessary to venture into some, at times, quite chal/ 
lenging conceptual territory. This is particularly the case in the second 
half of Chapter 1, where I elaborate a critical vocabulary that has emerged 
from the movements known as structuralism and poststructuralism, New 



01 pages i-xii 29/1/03 17:21 Page 



& 



xii Preface 

Historicism and cultural materialism; and in the second half of Chapter 2, 
where I consider debates about the origins of the novel which have been 
conditioned by these movements. 

In the light of this, a word about how to read this book: if during the more 
abstract discussions the reader should happen to find the going tough, move 
on to the more detailed case/study readings in individual chapters, which 
I generally cite after making a conceptual point, and which amount to 
illustrations of the general conceptual point I am making. It could be 
helpful to move around the book, taking advantage of the sections and the 
cross/referencing. Then reread the challenging section. Feel free to make 
choices: if the reader's immediate need is to find out how narrative in the 
novel works in principle and detail, turn to the beginning of Chapter 2 
(where I use Emma as an exemplary novel narrative). 

Literary study without concepts is not an option. Wherever possible I 
have provided definitions of more specialised concepts, such as point of 
view, rhetoric, discourse, intertextuality, the implied reader, and free indirect 
speech, to name but a few. However, it is worth stressing that definitions in 
themselves are of limited use: my definitions are always located in the context 
of an interlocking argument, and this is as important as the definitions. 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



S 



Introduction: straightforward discourse and 
novel transactions 



1.1 Literature and norvliterature? 

This book is an introduction to the novel and prose narrative as elements of 
literature. 'Literature' is a complex term. It can be used to describe a range 
of linguistic techniques and strategies which generate, for instance, a 
resonant image, or a sense of irony, or purposeful ambiguity, the effects of 
which would lead us to describe the writing which embodied it as 'literary'. 
'Literature' is most often used to signify a valued tradition of writings, 
which is implicitly how it functions when we speak of 'English literature'. 
When I use the term in this work, I by no means reject that meaning: many 
of the works I use to illustrate this study are major contributions to English 
literature which have their status confirmed in the regularity with which 
they are taught in schools, colleges and universities. However, this implies 
that 'English literature' is inseparable from processes of selection, which are 
embedded in structures of power and prestige. So I shall also take note of 
this position, and, consequently, argue against a view of 'literature' which 
assumes that it is a knowable and immutable thing for all times and all 
people. Consequently, novels and prose narratives will have more than one 
relation to different meanings of 'literature'. 

Reading the novel, and to a lesser extent the short story, in their relations 
to different meanings of 'literature' will be my principal focus. But I shall 
also explore the novel in relation to the biography and the autobiography: 
prose narratives which are classified as non/fictional, factual and often 'non/ 
literary', and, yet, which can invite complex responses from readers. If the 
boundaries of 'literature' are, from an historical point of view, never quite 
settled, then 'non/literature' becomes a category which we cannot ignore. 
We will need a rather different kind of critical approach to draw out the full 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



2 Introduction 

consequences of this point, which will be the overall aim of this intro' 
ductory chapter. To begin with, we should address the problem of prose 
which is, on the face of it, language which is rather less than 'literary'. 

1.2 Prose 

The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) defines prose as 'straightforward 
discourse' or 'the ordinary form of written or spoken language'. The 
ordinariness of prose makes it different from poetic language, which, at its 
most characteristic, is recognisable from the presence of rhyme or metre. 
This ordinariness is a strength from the perspective of communicative 
efficiency and flexibility. Prose is the medium I am writing in now, and it 
could equally be used to introduce readers to the use of computer software: 
'This introductory section of the Microsoft Windows User's Guide provides a 
guide to the documentation — so you know where to find information about 
working with Windows." But this rather militates against the literary 
credentials of prose, a point recognised by the journalist Andrew Marr 
when reviewing The New Oxford Book of English Prose (1998): 'prose is such 
a general commodity that a real anthology of English prose is unthinkable. 
It would spread too widely, from computer manuals to Sun editorials, and 
would be unreadable.' 2 Marr's comment raises two questions that will 
concern us. The first relates to his sense of prose as a 'general commodity': if 
prose is so ubiquitous, why are certain forms of prose adjudged distinctive? 
The second question raised by Marr is that of readability: if an anthology of 
the totality of English prose would be so inclusive as to be unthinkable, what 
is it that makes some forms of prose more pleasurably readable and thus 
selectable than the variety found in computer manuals? One answer to that 
question must be: narrative. 

1.3 Narrative 

In fact, the majority of anthologised pieces in The New Oxford Book of 
English Prose are from either novels or short stories, forms cast in narrative. In 
1752, the poet and critic Samuel Johnson reflected on why narrative is so 
captivating: 

No Stile of Conversation is more extensively acceptable than the Narrative. 
He who has stored his Memory with slight Anecdotes, private Incidents, and 
personal Particularities, seldom fails to find his Audience favourable. Almost 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Narrative 3 

every Man listens with Eagerness to contemporary History; perhaps almost every 
Man has some real or imaginary Connection with a celebrated Character, some 
desire to advance, or oppose a rising Name . . . He that is a Hearer in one Place, 
qualifies himself to become a Speaker in another; for though he cannot compre/ 
hend a Series of Argument, or transport the volatile Spirit of Wit without 
Evaporation, yet he thinks himself able to treasure up the various Incidents of a 
Story, and pleases his Hopes with the Information which he shall give to some 
inferior Society. 1 

Skilfully told stories give pleasure to their listeners. As Johnson indicates, 
narrative consists of 'Incidents' or events arranged into a story. These events 
are related by a 'Speaker', or narrator, and they are addressed to a 'Hearer'. 
The popular and non/specialised nature of narrative is evident from the way 
in which 'Hearers' can themselves become 'Speakers' or narrators in turn. 
We will all, at some points in our conversational lives, be narrators in ways 
that will not lead us all to be poets. Johnson reflects on the ordinary, everyday 
status of narrative as a conversational genre — a genre is a regular (conven/ 
tional) way of speaking or writing — which highlights similarities between 
this mode of communication and prose. 

This book will explore the workings of written prose narratives which 
relate 'History' in the form of 'private Incidents' acted out in the 'personal 
Peculiarities' of 'Characters' either 'real or imaginary'. For whilst Johnson 
is reflecting on oral narrative, his terms account for the defining charac 
teristics of written narrative genres such as biography and autobiography 
which narrate the lives of 'real' individuals. They also account for the 
'imaginary' representation of characters and their histories in the novel, a 
narrative form which was rising to prominence in England when Johnson 
was writing in the mid eighteenth century (see sections 2.11—14). 

It would be wrong to infer from this that all narrative is popular, conver/ 
sational and prosaic: epic poetry of grand subject matter and sophisticated 
diction such as John Milton's Paradise Lost is woven in the 'volatile Spirit of 
Wit', but is still a narrative. At the same time, narrative does not require 
Milton's epic grandeur to endow it with artistic status. By the end of the 
nineteenth century certain English novels had come to use prose in remark/ 
ably sophisticated — indeed poetic — ways which made the ordinary and 
prosaic the basis for distinctive literary art, a theme which will be pursued 
particularly in Chapter 4. The general argument of this book is that it is 
important to see such developments in cultural and historical contexts: in 
sections 4.4—5 I explore the narrative sophistication of Henry James's fiction 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



4 Introduction 

in relation to popular narrative forms such as the late nineteenth/century 
newspaper story. Having said this, we need to acknowledge that placing 
novels and prose narratives in social and historical contexts requires con/ 
siderations which respect the specific characteristics of narrative. 

1.4 Narrative in context: the novel, mimesis and poetics 

Narrative is generally classified as a mimetic medium. 'Mimesis' is a term 
used to describe literary modes which aim to 'imitate' human thoughts, 
speech, action and the world in which they take place: drama and narrative 
would be more readily recognised as mimetic than would lyric poetry. Given 
the mimetic impulses of narrative, and Johnson's recognition of the way in 
which narrative presents us with 'History', it is understandable that students 
expect to study novels and short stories in ways which accentuate their 
relation to the worldly situations which they dramatise. For instance, readers 
may turn to Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre to experience the lot of an orphan 
and governess in the Victorian period. It would appear that such novels 
reflect their historical contexts almost transparently. 

However, approaches to the novel and its contexts which assume that a 
narrative imitates or simply reflects the times in which it was made encounter 
obvious difficulties when confronted by certain narrative strategies. These 
challenging, self-conscious narrative strategies are explored in Chapter 5 
through Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy (an eighteenth/century novel), 
John Fowles's The French Lieutenant's Woman, Paul Auster's City of Glass, 
and Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children (twentieth/century novels). These 
narratives playfully expose the limits of mimesis. Although I shall argue that 
even playful, sceptical narrative strategies lead the reader back to worldly 
insights into societies and histories — in the case of Midnight's Children to 
colonial domination and its resistance — it will be important to demonstrate 
how these contexts have to be traced through narrative as a complex medium. 
This remains the case even when narratives appear to be transparently 
mimetic. 

If we adopt a basic distinction between the form and content of narrative 
— roughly, content is what a narrative says or is about, form is how it says it — 
then poetics is a formal mode of literary study based on the systematic 
identification and analysis of the devices and patterns which deliver the 
'how' of a narrative. Poetics is the essential starting point for analysing how 
narratives mediate their effects — even when that mediation amounts to a 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag? 



Formalism and old and new historicisms 5 

disavowal of narrative's capacity to reflect the world transparently. Sections 
2.1—5 are a reading of Jane Austen's Emma which uses poetics to explain its 
narrative strategies by accounting for the elements of narrative in general, 
such as events, point of view, and character. This will help to explain why 
Emma is viewed as 'literary'. 

But this raises another question: how do we trace social and cultural 
contexts in 'literary' strategies which did not come into the world ready/ 
made, but which were themselves shaped by processes of historical and 
cultural change? These questions will lead us into a debate about the origins 
of the novel as a distinctive literary form developing in conjunction with 
specific social and cultural circumstances in eighteenth/century England. 
This is a literary/critical debate that has been in progress since the 1950s, 
and continues in the present. Sections 2.7—10 will answer these questions 
through a reading of Samuel Richardson's early novel Pamela which will be 
framed by the questions: what do we mean by a novel? Which genres and 
writing techniques were drawn together to produce it? As we shall see, 
Pamela is based on the familiar letter and the journal. A cultural and critical 
debate about literacy and the making of the self in the mid eighteenth 
century will be traced through the distinctive way in which Richardson's 
Pamela transforms these genres into a special kind of narrative. 

1.5 The novel and prose narrative in literary /critical 
argument: formalism and old and new historicisms 

This brings us to the importance of literary/critical argument. Writers of 
novels often wrote critically and reflectively about the narrative strategies they 
were shaping, a point that will be demonstrated in connection with Samuel 
Richardson and Henry Fielding in section 2.10; George Eliot in 3.12; and 
Henry James, H. G. Wells and Virginia Woolf in 4.7 and 4.14. Moreover, 
since the nineteenth century, novels have been reviewed and judged in 
literary periodicals (sections 3.4 and 3.7 will explore examples of these). 
These practices link the novel to the academic literary criticism which has 
been practised on the form for around one hundred years: it demonstrates 
that the nature of narrative was actively debated and analysed in its own 
time. 

Whilst there are continuities between the critical writings of practising 
novelists of the past and more recent forms of literary criticism, it is also 
necessary to be alert to differences. The main difference is that, since the end 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



6 Introduction 

of the nineteenth century, the novel has become a major object of academic 
study in schools and higher education, viewed as an embodiment of literary 
and artistic tradition. This was not necessarily the function it was 'born' 
to, or a reliable index of the esteem in which it has sometimes been held, as 
this chapter will later suggest. Nonetheless, in becoming a major object of 
literary and artistic tradition, increasingly sophisticated varieties of literary 
criticism have been developed to validate this view of the novel. 

Literary criticism is a powerful shaping force in the study of literature, 
which has played, and continues to play, a central role in selecting what we 
read and how we read it. The initial forms of academic novel criticism to be 
formulated in the later nineteenth century were orientated towards historical 
study, in line with the general way in which English literature — a university 
discipline that barely existed before the end of the nineteenth century — was 
studied at that time. This approach emphasised the relationship between 
philology (the history of the language), the history of genre, and authorial 
genius in shaping a national literary tradition. Subsequently, the dominant 
modes of twentieth/century novel criticism have taken poetics as their 
orientation, emphasising the formal complexity of the novel (formalist 
approaches will be differentiated and discussed in more detail in sections 
2.1-5). 

Formalist approaches have generated rich insights, but also some draw/ 
backs. In making distinctions between literary and non/literary narrative 
strategies — by, for instance, foregrounding the complexity of point of view 
in the novel — formal approaches have commented richly on a selection of 
important novels whilst remaining relatively silent on non/fictional prose 
narratives such as biography and autobiography. Consequently these formal 
approaches to the novel have offered only limited insight into the wider 
literary and cultural significance of prose narrative. 

Biography and autobiography are complex narratives which can in/ 
vite readers to think again about what we mean by 'literature'. Victorian 
examples of these prose narratives are a major focus of sections 3.8—11, 
where I offer ways of reading Elizabeth Gaskell's The Life of Charlotte 
Bronte, and the working/class autodidact Samuel Bamford's autobiographi/ 
cal Early Days. My approach to narrative is framed by a style of new literary/ 
historical reading which looks for literariness in the supposedly non/literary, 
and the non/literary in literature. Such an approach can be aligned with 
such movements as poststructuralism, the New Historicism, and cultural 
materialism (as well as their feminist and postcolonial inflections): move/ 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag? 



Historicism, culture and rhetoric 7 

merits which have developed out of recent theoretical approaches to literary 
study/ The remainder of this chapter will provide a basic outline of the 
conceptual vocabulary which supports a new literary/historical approach, 
along with a discussion of its significance. The concepts of rhetoric, 
intertextuality, discourse and culture can provide readers with new ways of 
making literary/critical connections between novels and non/fictional 
narrative forms. At a deeper level they provide us with new ways of re 
thinking the historically shifting relations between literary and non/literary 
writings as practices which are embedded in cultural and social relations. 

Of course, new literary/historical approaches are not entirely new: one of 
the striking things about the conceptual vocabulary that will play a role in 
the more integrated approach to the novel and prose narrative I advocate is 
that an earlier version of it can be found at work in the 'old' historicism, 
which organised literary criticism prior to the ascendancy of formalism. We 
can observe this by returning to one of the first textbooks designed to 
introduce students to the study of the novel, in order to measure the simi/ 
larities and differences between 'old' and 'new' historicisms. 



1.6 Studying the novel and prose narrative: historicism, 
culture and rhetoric 

Selden L. Whitcomb's The Study of a Novel, published in 1906 when the 
author was an associate professor of English literature at the University of 
Kansas, addressed the first generation of students to study the novel as an 
academic exercise. Whitcomb's approach was historicist in the sense that he 
saw the development of the novel running parallel to and reflecting the grand 
historical progress of civilisation: 'Every great movement in the history of 
fiction, though modified by race and nationality, is one phase of a general 
cultural episode in modern civilisation." Whitcomb clearly understood 
'modernity' to be a process of change and transformation, and his evidence 
for the novel's links to this progressive movement were to be found in such 
grand constructs as civilisation, the race, the nation and culture. 'Culture', 
as Raymond Williams has pointed out, is a complex word with a wide sem/ 
antic range, and we will encounter its different past and present meanings in 
what remains of this chapter. 6 

To begin with, Whitcomb supposes that the progress of civilisation is 
reflected in novels which, when taken together, constitute a major 'cultural 
episode' in that process. This was because the novel, for Whitcomb, reflected 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



8 Introduction 

'cultural life in general'. For Whitcomb, 'culture' shaped the specificities of 
race and nation, and the mimetic capabilities of the novel 'give one a more 
extensive picture of social culture than any other form of art' (p. 138). In 
making this claim he brought 'culture' and 'society' together in a way which 
was characteristic of nineteenth/century thought. Societies were conceived 
as historically developing organisms, made up of varied yet interdependent 
social classes and groupings. What distinguished these societies from one 
another was the distinctive pattern of 'culture' by which such societies lived, 
the term here embracing knowledge, belief, law, morals and customs. In this 
sense 'culture' was conceived anthropologically as a whole way of life 
(the impact of this conception of culture on George Eliot's novels will be 
examined in section 3.12). Not only could the novel reflect culture, it was 
formed from the expressive essence of culture: Whitcomb noted that the 
novel's 'medium of expression, language ... must always suggest some 
special type of cultural life' (p. 138). This was to be found in a detailed study 
of the novel, and his textbook opened with a close analysis of its distinctive 
narrative structures (events, episodes, story, plot, character, point of view) 
and their artistic effects. To this extent, Whitcomb's cultural historicism 
depended on formal analysis. Yet, he approached the question of form from 
a specific perspective. 

Whitcomb wrote from the perspective of an American university system 
which placed a strong emphasis on 'comparative rhetoric' and composition 
(p. 218). Rhetoric is a discipline with ancient roots, concerned with 
analysing the construction of oral and written compositions in order to 
maximise their persuasive and affective powers on their intended addressees. 
Clearly rhetoric has a practical aim to advise writers on good, and not so 
good, ways of writing. Whitcomb's book regularly suggests compositional 
exercises which will assist in clarifying the rhetorical effects of particular 
modes of writing: Assuming that Silas Marner [in George Eliot's novel of 
1860] was a real individual, recast the novel into the form of a biography' 
(p. 225). This is something that I put into practice, albeit on a less ambitious 
scale, when I rewrite passages of narrative in sections 2.2 and 4.12 to assess 
the workings of the originals. In section 3.10 I focus specifically on 
biography as a distinctively rhetorical form of writing. 

The approach I adopt towards biography urges an appreciation of rhetoric 
as a significant critical tool with much broader implications. Formalist novel 
criticism in the twentieth century has, with some exceptions, 7 tended to 
neglect the role of rhetoric. But in the last decades of the twentieth century 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



From 'literature' to 'intertextuality' 9 

critics have rediscovered rhetoric, because it enables critical and analytical 
insight into the social and historical contexts within which particular forms 
of narrative have aspired to be persuasive and powerful. There are two 
consequences which follow from this: first, rhetoric encourages readers 
of narrative to widen their horizons beyond the novel, and to look at the 
workings of the novel in relation to other kinds of narrative (and non/ 
narrative) material — I'll explore this in the following sections. Secondly, if 
we remember that rhetoric has a persuasive aim, then a rhetorical approach 
to narratives can highlight the way in which narratives have entered into 
contests to secure the attention of readers, or tell the truth from particular 
perspectives. Rhetoric can be seen as an index of the struggles that divide, 
fracture and fragment the historical process along the lines of gender, class 
and race. I'll explore these in more detail in the following sections: they will 
lead us to an accordingly modified understanding of 'culture'. 

1.7 The novel and prose narrative: from 'literature' to 
'intertextuality' 

A defining feature of the novel is that it does not belong to any single genre, 
yet participates in all genres. Whitcomb's rhetorical approach to the novel 
acknowledges its borrowings from the conventions which distinguish other 
literary modes and prose genres. For instance, Whitcomb suggests that 
'students of the novel might profit by plot analysis of [Thomas] Carlyle's 
French Revolution', a colourful and dramatic work of history published in 
1837 (p. 48). Thus Whitcomb saw the novel as a 'complex, composite ... 
type' (p. 218) which was made up from 'literature itself. 

By 'literature' Whitcomb meant a vast field in which writings and generic 
conventions circulated. It included drama, which provided conventions for 
representing the speech, thought and action of characters. It also included 
the prose genres of the narrative history (such as Carlyle's French Revolution), 
which provided models for plotting the passage of time and processes of 
social change and continuity. The prose genre of documentary reportage 
provided models for writing about the observation of social life and manners 
on which the 'realistic' effects of novels often depend (different critical 
accounts of 'realism' will be traced in sections 2.12 and 3.12). The bio/ 
graphy provided models for narrating the life/course of individual characters. 
Finally the essay provided models for narrative commentary and discussion 
(p. 171). 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



10 Introduction 

Whitcomb's approach to the derivativeness of the novel anticipates 
present/day approaches to what have come to be known as the 'inter/ 
textualities' of narrative. These approaches are premised on understanding 
narrative as 'text', that is to say a tissue of interwoven writings. Thus 
'intertextuality' is a concept which seeks to grasp the fact that a novel 'is not 
a self-contained, individually authored whole, but the absorption and 
transformation of other texts'. 8 The intertextualities of the novel and prose 
narrative will be a consistent focus of my approach, especially in Chapter 2, 
where I consider the eighteenth/century origins of the novel; Chapter 3, 
which considers the relation of the Victorian novel to contemporary bio/ 
graphical and autobiographical narratives; and Chapter 5, which explores 
the complex intertextualities of late twentieth/century postmodern and post/ 
colonial fictions (the absorption and transformation of Laurence Sterne's 
parodic eighteenth/century novel Tristram Shandy in Salman Rushdie's 
Midnight's Children in particular). In thinking about the significance of 
intertextuality, it is necessary to make links with the concept of discourse, 
and broader trends in present/day literary theory. 

1.8 The novel and prose narrative as 'forms of discourse' 

Whitcomb's approach addressed the different 'forms of discourse' that are 
woven together in the novel (p. 218). 'Discourse' is a term which links 
Whitcomb's book to present/day theoretical concerns, though in consider/ 
ing these we shall need to trace some shifts in its meaning. 'Discourse' derives 
from the Latin discursus, which means to run to and fro: the OED tells us 
that some of the earliest sixteenth/century usages in English employ the term 
to describe, for example, the movements of the sun during its daily course 
across the sky. At around about the same time, 'discourse' was also being 
used to classify any spoken or written treatment of a subject. For Whitcomb 
'discourse' describes an approach to the analysis of a novel's composite 
textual structure as it goes to and fro between a variety of genres, their 
linguistic conventions and implied social contexts. Late twentieth/century 
theoretical approaches to novel and narrative criticism continue to invoke 
'discourse' in this sense. At the same time they have gone further in using the 
term to probe the linguistic, social and power relations that are embedded in 
a narrative's absorption of 'discourses'. 

It is beyond the scope of this book to provide a detailed introduction to the 
terrain of literary theory which has transformed literary study in Britain 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



'Forms of discourse' 11 

since the mid 1970s. 9 It is possible to outline a general sense of the way in 
which it has transformed an understanding of the orientation of language in 
general, which has, in turn, had major implications for the language of the 
novel and prose narrative. The initial impetus for the turn to theory derived 
from Ferdinand de Saussure's early twentieth/century linguistics and its 
adoption by the continental European structuralist and semiotic movement 
of the 1950s and 1960s ('semiotics' is the study of signs). 

What did Saussure and structuralism challenge? Selden Whitcomb 
wrote his 1906 guide to the novel in an intellectual climate which recognised 
language as a rhetorical medium, but a medium which individuals could 
freely use to refer to and express the things of the world, human states 
of mind, emotions and so forth. This made language an intelligible fact of 
nature. Whitcomb accepted that writers would struggle with the imperfec 
tions of language in an effort to express their 'ideas and ideals'; but in the end 
they 'may take delight in calm obedience to the will of nature, as it appears 
in ... language' (p. 248). 

In a radical departure, Saussure's linguistics argued that language does 
not work on the basis of nature, reference and expression. Instead, it works 
on the basis of convention, signification and difference. Saussure no longer 
started with a conception of the word, conceiving instead of the 'sign', 
arguing that signs generate meaning not because they refer to things; 
on the contrary, they have a completely arbitrary relationship to things. 
Signs generate meaning because of conventionally maintained relations of 
difference from one another within a self-contained structure ('la langue', 
or language). 10 This powerful, self-contained structure is something that 
humans are born into: language speaks, or writes, its users, rather than the 
other way round. In practice, this structural and semiotic theory of language 
breaks the natural 'fit' between language and the world which was always a 
possibility for pre/structuralist novel criticism. For the novel and narrative, 
this break means that its mimetic effects have to be seen as being derived from 
signification rather than reference and expression. If the novel imitates at all 
then it imitates the conventions of signification which structure language as 
a practice. Instead of imitating the things of the world, the novel imitates 
language structures. 

These arguments have been extended by certain present/day theories of 
'discourse'. One of the difficulties with Saussure's structuralist theory of 
language is that 'la langue' is assumed to be homogeneous and smoothly self- 
regulating. This is where theories of 'discourse' take Saussure's insights in 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



12 Introduction 

directions which theorise language as a field fractured by complex social and 
historical conflicts." Poststructuralist discourse theorists argue that 'la 
langue' is really an array of discursive practices, or specific domains of 
speaking and writing, which authorise and regulate social life and power 
relations. 

Poststructuralist critics have started to reread the novel in history in the 
light of discourse theory. Nancy Armstrong has argued that manners and 
morals of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were institutionalised in 
the discourse of domesticity, which became the object of Richardson's novel 
Pamela (see section 2.14). Discursive practices also authorise and regulate 
recognisably institutionalised knowledges, such as religion, philosophy, the 
law, medicine and science. These can be equally important to the novel: the 
authority of the discourse of scientific 'biology', which emerged only in the 
nineteenth century, is used decisively in H. G. Wells's novel Ann Veronica 
(1909) (see section 4.8). Over time the status, internal composition and 
relations between discourses change. Nancy Armstrong's reading of Pamela 
argues that its discourses of domesticity and sexual desire acquired con/ 
siderable authority and power in the middle of the eighteenth century. By 
the time of H. G. Wells's novel, domesticity could no longer be assigned 
such authority (Wells's heroine has to escape its stifling suburban mani/ 
festation). In Wells's novel biology is the master discourse which assumes 
authority over the messy conflict waged between other competing social 
and political discourses, which the narrative dramatises through character 
types. 

Discourses 'make' characters in novels and in life: they do this by marking 
out particular positions — so/called subject positions — from which indi' 
vidual subjects and collective interests can fashion identities. Accordingly, 
discourses construct evaluations of individual identity based on the social 
categories of masculinity and femininity (gender), class and social rank, and 
race and ethnicity. This is a particularly important point for the new literary/ 
historical rationale in constructing links between novels, biographies and 
autobiographies. These emerged as important genres for absorbing and trans/ 
forming discourses of subjectivity to articulate what Dipesh Chakrabarty 
has described as 'the public and private rituals of modern individualism'. 12 
I noted in my brief discussion of Saussure that one of the implications of his 
theory of language is that language 'makes' the self. 'Literature' can be 
viewed as a discourse which can be drawn upon in these rituals of self- 
making. If we take 'literature' to be present in specific, prestigious uses of 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



The novel and 'culture' revisited 13 

language, we will see how the Victorian working/class writer Samuel 
Bamford uses 'literary' discourse in his autobiography to fashion an image of 
himself as a 'cultured' individual (see section 3.9). 



1.9 The novel and 'culture' revisited: 'culture' as learning, 
'self-culture', 'culture' as a field of conflict 

Whitcomb's book was aimed at the first generation of students who were 
beginning to study the novel as 'literature'. This brings us to another sense 
of the novel's relationship to 'culture' which is implicit in Whitcomb's 
project: 'culture' as the learned study of selected and valued objects which 
could promote the moral and intellectual growth of an individual reader in 
'self-culture'. As I shall demonstrate in Chapters 2 and 3, novels such as 
Richardson's Pamela and Bronte's Jane Eyre told powerful stories about selves 
which were expected to enrich their readers morally. And yet, a certain 
defensiveness in Whitcomb's tone indicates the difficulty he faced when 
installing the novel in general as a valued and self-improving object of study: 
'it is no longer deemed necessary to apologise for fiction itself, but a detailed 
study of its form is still quite generally proposed in apologetic tones' (p. vii). 
Whitcomb's comment recognises the novel's quasi'disreputable past during 
which it had, in some incarnations, been vilified as trivial or downright 
harmful to processes of 'self-culture'. 

Let us look at what was at stake in two examples of ways in which the 
novel was seen to be harmful to 'self-culture'. Because novels are classified 
as fictions or made/up stories, and because certain Protestant theologies are 
distrustful of imitations and images, novels were anathema to some religious 
sects, especially during the nineteenth century. However, the same sects still 
subscribed to the benefits of 'self-culture' through approved forms of read/ 
ing. If novels were rejected, biographies and autobiographies — non/fictional 
narratives about 'real', exemplary individual lives — were considered to 
be suitable. 13 Another example of the novel's perceived harmfulness was 
articulated supposedly in defence of women readers of novels in the nine/ 
teenth century, whose 'weaker minds' were deemed, in the gendered dis' 
courses of biological and psychological science, to be more susceptible to 
damage under the influence of sensationally shocking narratives. 14 The 
point to note about these examples of attempts to regulate the relations 
between the novel and 'self-culture' is that they judge the novel through, 
on the one hand, discourses of theology and its distinctions between 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



14 Introduction 

divine truth and devious fiction; and, on the other, gendered science and 
psychology. 

This brings us to the least immediately obvious, yet most important sense 
of the relation of the novel and prose narrative to 'culture'. This defines 
'culture' as a field, actualised in print and book production, in which 
meanings are made and exchanged, and discourses clash and collide over 
contests between, for instance, the real and the fictional, high and low taste, 
convention and originality, and masculine and feminine identities. Novels 
can be open to challenge in this field by authoritative discourses which 
dismiss them as trivial or harmful. But novels can selectively absorb those 
authoritative discourses into their intertexts, as we shall see in Jane Eyre's use 
of psychological discourse (section 3.5). Novels can also, as we shall see in 
sections 4.4—5, aspire to the higher echelons of the field by refining 
themselves into serious mediators of a refined artistic perspective on life. Or, 
indeed, novels can adopt a playful and parodic orientation towards cultural 
discourses (Chapter 5). Thus novels in England have been, since the 
eighteenth century at least, important participants in the field of culture, 
absorbing discourses into their narrative intertexts which rehearse and seek 
to resolve conflicts over contested values and meanings. 

This way of seeing the novel needs to be blended with the very factors that 
grant novels their privileged position in the cultural field, which is based on 
the subjective investments and involvements that they invite of their readers. 
Novels engagingly dramatise conflicts over truth and value through stories 
about character formation and relationships in recognisable social settings, 
where the everyday materials of manners, morals, customs and beliefs seem 
to be like life itself. In other words, readers can generally seek the pleasurable 
surface presence of a mimetic 'picture of social culture', to use Whitcomb's 
words again. But this is an effect, an artfully constructed alibi to deflect from 
the contest of discourses that is being waged. 

But the contest is never deflected completely. Certain narratives, for 
instance those I shall address in Chapter 5, insist that the reader recognises 
them for what they are: narrative discourses. And even in more transparent 
reading experiences, readers are often invited to negotiate complex linguistic 
or indeed 'literary' effects. Whitcomb noted that 'the interpretation of 
culture by the novelist often has a touch of irony, for the imagination sees 
manners in their relative values' (p. 138). Whitcomb recognised, import/ 
antly, that novelists can be active and critical interpreters of that which they 
represent, as is evident in the degree of ironic distance perceptible in even 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Notes 15 

the clearest picture of manners or morals. If we remember that discourse 
signifies in order to produce the effect of mimesis, it follows that irony in the 
novel is produced by linguistic means; that is to say, the imitation and ironic 
framing or 'quoting' of voices and forms of discourse. This is a point that I 
shall demonstrate in section 2.6, when I analyse the narrative techniques of 
free indirect speech in Jane Austen's Emma; and section 4.2, where I analyse 
'language images' in Charles Dickens's Bleak House. Both techniques invite 
complex literary responses, but the general point to emphasise is that these 
are shaped by the discursive contexts, and conflicts of culture, in which the 
novels participate. 

For Selden Whitcomb the development of the novel in history coincided 
with periods of conflict: 'the novel has flourished most in periods of 
complex social life, when antagonistic currents of thought were meeting, 
giving rise to social, ethical and aesthetic problems' (p. 160). To that extent 
Whitcomb's view of the novel is close to that which has been formulated by 
an important twentieth/century Russian theorist and historian of the novel, 
M. M. Bakhtin. Bakhtin's view of the history of the novel will be discussed 
in more detail in section 5.6. Broadly, he conceived the novel as a dynamic 
form in continuous and active dialogue with the forms of language and 
discourse which struggled against one another at particular moments of 
social and cultural history." The main difference between Whitcomb and 
Bakhtin, and other present/day critics who have moved broadly in line with 
the new literary/historicism, is this: for Whitcomb the novel was a reflection 
of social change and conflict, whereas for critics in the present the discursive 
intertexts of the novel and prose narrative are seen as active participants in 
shaping and negotiating these cultural conflicts — sources of power in their 
own right. 

Notes 

1. Microsoft Windows: Version 3.1 User's Guide (Microsoft Corporation, 1990—2), 
p. xix. 

2. Observer, 20 September 1998. 

3. Samuel Johnson, Rambler 188, in Mona Wilson (ed.), Johnson: Prose and Poetry 
(London: Rupert Hart/Davis, 1950), p. 266. 

4. For a recent representative statement of what a newliterary approach amounts 
to, see Thomas O. Beebee, Epistolary Fiction in Europe, 1500—1850 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999), Chapter 1. For more detailed guidance to 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



16 Introduction 

the New Historicism and cultural materialism, see the select bibliography. 

5. Selden L. Whitcomb, The Study of a Novel (London: D. C. Heath, 1906), 
p. 195. All future references to this text will be to this edition and given in 
parentheses in the main text. 

6. For Raymond Williams's account of the meanings of 'culture', to which my 
discussion is indebted, see Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society, 2nd 
edition (London: Fontana, 1983). 

7. The work of Wayne C Booth, which will be described in more detail in 
Chapter 2. 

8. See Stephen Heath, 'Intertextuality', in Michael Payne (ed.), A Dictionary of 
Cultural and Critical Theory (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996), p. 258. 

9. An excellent starting point is Roger Webster's Studying Literary Theory: An 
Introduction (London: Arnold, 1990). For more detailed guidance, see the select 
bibliography. 

10. For an accessible and lucid introduction see Terence Hawkes's Structuralism and 
Semiotics, New Accents (London: Methuen, 1977). 

11. For a more detailed introductory account see Diane MacDonell, Theories of 
Discourse (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986). 

12. Dipesh Chakrabarty, 'Postcoloniality and the Artifice of History: Who 
Speaks for Indian Pasts;', Representations 17 (winter 1992), 1—26, reprinted 
in H. Aram Veeser (ed.), The New Historicism Reader (London: Routledge, 
1994), p. 341. 

13. This was in part due to the authority of traditions of spiritual autobiography 
deriving in the main from the seventeenth century, in which powerful con/ 
version experiences were recorded. Hagiographical traditions of biography 
recording the good works of an individual were also influential. For the 
nineteentlvcentury context see Richard D. Altick, The English Common Reader: 
A Social History of the MasS'Reading Public (Chicago and London: University 
of Chicago Press, 1957), pp. 122—3. 

14. See Kate Flint, 'The Woman Reader and the Opiate of Fiction', in Jeremy 
Hawthorn (ed.), The Nineteenth' Century British Novel, Stratford/upon/Avon 
Studies (London: Arnold, 1985). 

15. For a lucid and accessible introduction to Bakhtin's thought and his approach 
to the novel, see Michael Holquist's Dialogism: Bakhtin and His World, New 
Accents (London: Routledge, 1990). 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



The elements of narrative analysis and the origins 
of the novel: reading Jane Austen's Emma and 
Samuel Richardson's Pamela 



2.1 The novel and formalist criticism 

Jane Austen's Emma announced itself to readers in the following terms 
when it was published in 1816: EMMA: / A NOVEL / IN 
THREE VOLUMES / BY THE AUTHOR OF 'PRIDE AND 
PREJUDICE'. 1 This suggests a number of 'givens': that 'the novel' was an 
identifiable cultural institution, recognised by 'novel' readers; that certain 
authors were 'novelists' to whom readers would return because of prior 
performances (Jane Austen is not named, instead there is a reference to the 
earlier Pride and Prejudice); that readers would find a continuous narrative 
in the three separate volumes comprising the work. Two years before in a 
postscript to his novel Waverley (1814, published anonymously), Sir Walter 
Scott was able to write confidently of a 'contract' between reader and 
novelist. 2 If all of this points to the existence of a stable and knowing 
relationship between novelists and readers in the first decades of the 
nineteenth century, why is it that Percy Lubbock, over one hundred years 
later in 1921, should complain in an influential book entitled The Craft of 
Fiction of 'the want of a received nomenclature', or vocabulary, for the 
purpose of 'criticising the craft of fiction'? 3 

Lubbock's sense of a lack can be explained by the fact that he was 
'inventing' a formalist novel criticism. Novel reading might be founded on 
an implicit contract, but criticism had to be explicit and precise. Lubbock's 
own preference for a critical vocabulary, centred on the question of narrative 
point of view, was derived rather selectively from his mentor Henry James, 
a late nineteenth/century novelist and critic whose legacy will be examined 
in sections 4.5—7. Lubbock argued that the novel, in order to be considered 
as good art, ought to be unified around a consistent narrative point of view 
(a concept which will be explored in section 2.5 below). 

17 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



18 The elements of narrative analysis 

In claiming that there was no received vocabulary, there is a sense in which 
Lubbock was overlooking the intellectual past he could have built upon. 4 
For instance, when John Colin Dunlop published his monumental History 
of Prose Fiction in 1814 (the same year as Waverley), he was attentive to what 
he called 'disposition', or narrative method, and, accordingly, to the fact that 
any explicatory summary would edit out the 'style and sentiments', or formal 
details, that made the way in which a 'subject' was treated in narrative 
distinctive. 5 

Dunlop approached his subject historically; he was interested in the 
'genesis and genealogy of fiction'. Lubbock's approach consciously 
swerved away from the problems of historical and cultural difference, 
and his invention of ahistorical, formalist criticism inaugurated a particular 
tradition of critical reading. 7 This has developed into an important approach 
to reading the novel. In the first part of this chapter, I shall look at the way 
in which this tradition can help readers to appreciate the narrative distinc 
tiveness of Austen's Emma, a text that knew itself to be a novel. In addition 
to Lubbock I shall consider the work of Wayne C. Booth, Seymour 
Chatman and Shlomith Rimmon/Kenan. 8 

At the same time it is worth highlighting a sceptical note that Lubbock 
strikes when he observes that 'the literary critic, with nothing to point to but 
the mere volume in his hand, must recognize that his wish to be precise, to 
be definite, to be clear and exact in his statements, is hopelessly vain." In one 
sense, Lubbock conceived this as a state of affairs that his own approach 
would begin to rectify. However, as I will argue, something confirming the 
vanity of longed'for critical precision is manifest in the way that vocabulary 
is not at all settled between formalist critics themselves. 

Lubbock's sceptical point raises an even more searching question: what 
kind of an object are we studying when we read a novel? According to 
Lubbock's way of reading, our task is to analyse singular works of narrative 
art. But it may be that we need to think about that seemingly autonomous 
text intertextually: that is to say, as a text which has absorbed and trans/ 
formed other texts and discourses (see section 1.7). This will involve us 
in having to think differently about the construction of that category, 'the 
novel', which seems so settled from our hitherto limited exploration of 
Austen and Scott. The second half of this chapter will explore these 
questions in relation to Samuel Richardson's Pamela (1740) and other works 
which figure in the debate about the rise of the novel. This will involve a shift 
from one style of critical discussion to another: the chapter will begin with 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Reading the form of narrative fiction 19 

close reading, but will use this as a basis for a move to, first, more historical 
and then theoretical styles of discussion. The end of the chapter will return 
to Emma again to reconsider Austen's text in the new light shed by these 
styles of discussion. 

2.2 Reading the form of narrative fiction: 
Jane Austen's Emma 

In The Craft of Fiction Lubbock distinguished between stories which 'tell' 
their readers what to think, and stories which 'show' their readers actions or 
thoughts which invite the reader to make judgements on the basis of more 
active processes of sense/making and interpretation. He held the latter to be 
more artistically coherent and satisfying. 

First, 'telling': in the opening paragraphs of Emma, the relationship 
between Emma and her governess Miss Taylor is described in the following 
way: 'the shadow of authority being now long passed away, they had been 
living together as friend and friend very mutually attached, and Emma 
doing just what she liked; highly esteeming Miss Taylor's judgement, but 
directed chiefly by her own' (p. 37). Here, the reader is told what to think 
about their relationship and Emma's tendency to do as she likes. 

What if Jane Austen were to have written this in a different way? The 
effect of 'showing' can be assessed through experimental rewriting: 

Emma looked at her friend and could recall a distant time when it had been Miss 
Taylor's duty to exercise authority; Emma esteemed Miss Taylor's judgement as 
the very source of her own ability to discriminate confidently and act decisively 
in ways which, strangely, were often contrary to her former governess's. 

This is angled more from Emma's perspective: although it is still written in 
the grammatical third person, Emma is realised as a dramatised centre of 
consciousness — the reader is in touch with her thoughts — confirmed by 
the way in which we seem to 'hear' something of the surprise in her voice 
('strangely') from which we infer a lack of self-awareness. The reader comes 
to the same conclusion about the Emma— Miss Taylor relationship, and 
about Emma's forthright and excessive self-confidence which leads her to do 
what she wants: but the judgement is based on something that the reader has 
been 'shown' rather than told. 

Lubbock's distinction between 'showing' and 'telling' is a useful intro> 
duction to some of the major issues that have preoccupied formalist critics of 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



20 The elements of narrative analysis 

the novel. At the same time, later critics have found it wanting. In 1961 
Wayne C. Booth pointed out in The Rhetoric of Fiction that it was unwise to 
rate 'showing' above 'telling' because the distinction was 'arbitary', in the 
sense that narrative is always told from some source or other. Rejecting 
Lubbock's concern with narrative unity and consistent 'method', Booth 
was more interested in the 'many voices' that an author uses to tell a tale 
effectively. 10 But a grasp of the way in which these 'many voices' are ordered 
requires a more detailed and elaborate account of narrative than Lubbock 
offered. 

In his book Story and Discourse (1978), Seymour Chatman devised a 
model for anatomising the formal elements and relations of narrative; it 
aimed to provide the critical reader with a framework for identifying the 
'many voices' and levels of meaning production at work in a narrative: 

real author... > (implied author > narrator > narratee > implied reader) 
. . . > real reader 

The elements within the parentheses ( ) are the most important aspects of 
this model. Thus, the activities of the real author and the real reader are 
constrained by a set of formal relations which are internal to the narrative. 
These internal relations will guide our reading of Emma, helping the real 
reader to identify, for example, when the implied reader is invited by 
the narrator to read some aspect of the story — received opinion, character 
speech, thoughts or actions — ironically. The model will also help to 
highlight some of the major terminological and conceptual differences 
between critics who have developed the formal approach. For although 
Chatman concluded his work by defending the precision, integrity and 
inclusiveness of his model, in practice critics have continued to argue about 
his terminology and categories, which would seem to confirm Lubbock's 
lurking scepticism about the quest for precision in vocabulary. 12 

Before embarking on a close analysis of the opening paragraphs of Emma 
— which will in turn lead us to ways of thinking about events, charac 
terisation and point of view — we need to say an introductory word about 
the concept of the implied reader. An addressee is a rhetorical feature of all 
written discourse. In mentioning the 'critical reader' in the paragraph pre/ 
ceding Chatman's model, the discourse of this book inscribes the sort of 
reader who is implied by the development of its argument and choice 
of examples: someone who wants, or needs, to become skilled as a critical 
reader of the novel and prose narrative. The concept of the implied reader 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Implied reader, real reader 21 

draws attention to the fact that any writing, whether imaginative or critical, 
is addressed to a reader who is assumed to have, temporarily at least, an 
investment in the means and ends of that writing. According to Wayne C. 
Booth in his classic account of the rhetorical means and persuasive ends of 
fictional narrative, and in which he devoted a substantial portion to the 
technical feats of Emma, control of the reader is the goal." 

2.3 Implied reader, real reader: narrator, implied author 

The pact that is established between a narrative discourse and the reader 
implied in that discourse is central to effective fictional prose narrative. As 
you will see from Chatman's diagram, this pact has to be located in relation 
to the narrator, who imparts to the reader the 'contents' of the story: the 
events, the locations in which they unfold, and the characters affected. We 
can look now at the opening of Emma in full: 

Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home and 
happy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence; and 
had lived nearly twentyone years in the world with very little to distress or vex 
her. 

She was the youngest of two daughters of a most affectionate, indulgent 
father, and had, in consequence of her sister's marriage, been mistress of his 
house from a very early period. Her mother had died too long ago for her to have 
more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses, and her place had been 
supplied by an excellent woman as governess, who had fallen little short of a 
mother in affection. 

Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr Woodhouse's family, less as a 
governess than a friend, very fond of both daughters, but particularly of Emma. 
Between them it was more the intimacy of sisters. Even before Miss Taylor had 
ceased to hold the nominal office of governess, the mildness of her temper had 
hardly allowed her to impose any restraint; and the shadow of authority being 
long now passed away, they had been living as friend and friend very mutually 
attached, and Emma doing just what she liked; highly esteeming Miss Taylor's 
judgement, but directed chiefly by her own. 

The real evils, indeed, of Emma's situation were the power of having rather 
too much her own way, and a disposition to think too well of herself; these were 
the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments. The danger, 
however, was so unperceived, that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes 
with her. 

Sorrow came — a gentle sorrow — but not at all in the shape of any disagreeable 
consciousness. — Miss Taylor married. It was Miss Taylor's loss which first 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



22 The elements of narrative analysis 

brought grief. It was on the wedding day of this beloved friend that Emma first 
sat in mournful thought of any continuance. The wedding over and the bride/ 
people gone, her father and herself were left to dine together, with no prospect of 
a third to cheer the long evening, (p. 37) 

The reader implied here by the third/person narrator's opening description 
of Emma Woodhouse values good looks, cleverness, wealth and domestic 
comfort. The real reader — you, situated at a different point in history 
possessed of, in all probability, somewhat different social horizons to the 
implied reader of 1816 — may value these less than other things. But to read 
the novel appropriately, the real reader enters into the position of the implied 
reader. Actually, the implied reader is invited to look beyond these values by 
appreciating, at relevant points, a tone of playfulness and irony which 
relativises this limited scale of values in relation to wider, more generous 
possibilities. This tone is conveyed by the functions of the narrator in the 
use of words such as 'seemed'. The fact that Emma 'seemed to unite some of 
the best blessings of existence' implies a distance between appearance and 
reality. In discussing the role of the narrator as the authoritative and ironising 
source of the story, we shall also need to think about the role that is 
sometimes played by an 'implied author'. 

The first point to make about the implied author is that it is a function 
which needs to be distinguished from the real author, Jane Austen. Wayne 
C. Booth has gone so far as to argue that the implied author is the real 
author's 'second self, though the idea of an authoritative 'shadow' function 
to the narrator is of more practical use in analysis. 11 An implied author as 
'shadow' is most evident in narratives where we follow the guidance of a 
dramatised, unreliable narrator; that is to say a first/person narrator of 
limited understanding who has to some degree participated in the story 
being told. Thus in Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights (1847), it is clear that 
Mr Lockwood's narration of the situation he walks into at the Heights is not 
reliable: his evaluation of Heathcliff as a 'capital fellow!' sits uneasily with 
Heathcliff's 'suspicious' and 'jealous' disposition. 15 It is as though there is, 
as the source of the latter adjectives, a 'shadow' function which, to correct 
Lockwood's effusive and unknowing dramatised first/person narration, 
'establishes norms for the work', in Seymour Chatman's phrase." 

Shlomith Rimmon/Kenan is sceptical about the need to find an implied 
author in all narratives. Rimmon/Kenan prefers to distinguish between 
'forms and degrees of perceptibility of the narrator in the text'. 17 In Emma the 
third/person narrator is highly perceptible, and explicitly involved in the 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Events: story and discourse 23 

process of establishing 'norms', so here the function of narrator and implied 
author have merged. In Emma the narrator moves between statements which 
invite inference, and statements which didactically state the conclusion 
which the implied reader has been invited to draw. As we have already seen, 
at the end of the third paragraph the narrator observes that Emma esteems 
Miss Taylor's judgement whilst she follows her own. Just in case the reader 
has missed the point the narrator then states the 'real evils' of Emma's 
situation: that the young Emma has had too much her own way, and that 
restraining authority has been absent from her upbringing. The norm that is 
established in these opening paragraphs is that individual judgement needs 
to be checked by a more sagacious authority. We might add that the third/ 
person narrative voice is precisely the authority that Emma has been deprived 
of through the negligible presence of a self-absorbed father and a friend 
rather than a governess. 

In addition to establishing 'norms', the narrator of Emma also performs 
the function which in some narratives may be performed by the implied 
author: that is, 'stacking the cards', to borrow again from Chatman. By this, 
Chatman means the function of shaping and clarifying the implied reader's 
dramatic expectations in the deployment of strategic words such as 'un/ 
perceived'. The 'danger ... at present ... unperceived' points to a reversal 
not glimpsed by Emma, but which is now anticipated by the implied reader. 
The narrator in Emma establishes norms and stimulates an appetite for narra/ 
tive and the events that it organises. According to this model, the implied 
reader is at least as enthralled by the pleasures of narrative anticipation as by 
morals and values. 

2.4 Events: story and discourse 

This brings us to a consideration of events. Without events, there could be 
no story for the reader to anticipate and follow. Rimmon/Kenan defines an 
event as, quite simply, something that happens and that can be summed up 
by a verb or the name of an occurrence. 18 The whole enterprise of ordering 
and making sense of events is made pleasurable and challenging by the fact 
that, contrary to superficial appearances, events in a narrative discourse are 
seldom presented to us in strict chronological order. An example from the 
first paragraph of Emma would be that in the narrator's recounting of events 
relevant to Emma's early life, we find out about Emma's sister's marriage 
before we are told of the death of the sisters' mother, though the latter is, 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



24 The elements of narrative analysis 

chronologically, the prior event. Thus our conventional sense of time and 
sequence leads us to wish to reorder events. In making sense of events, the 
implied reader keeps moving between, to borrow terms from Chatman, the 
'what' of the 'story' (the events comprising the story sequentially arranged) 
and the 'how' of the 'discourse' (their manner of being narrated). 

The passage above ends with the event which inaugurates the main 
action, the marriage of Miss Taylor to Mr Weston. This is represented 
sparingly as an event that has just passed, so, simultaneously, we also need to 
think in a 'how' mode. Percy Lubbock would describe its manner of being 
registered as a 'summary' rather than a 'scene'; had it been a 'scene' we might 
have had a full account of the wedding, its social interactions represented 
in the dialogue or direct speech which is such a strong component of later 
significant 'scenes' in the novel, such as the ball at the Crown, Highbury, in 
Chapter 38." This is characteristic of the flexible resources of prose narra/ 
tive in its relations to the representation of events; the chronological duration 
of an event is seldom equivalent to the volume of narrative discourse alio/ 
cated to it; after all, going back to the passage, twenty/one years of Emma's 
life pass in the space of five/and'a/bit shortish paragraphs. 

But there is more to be said about this summary of Miss Taylor's marriage: 
it represents Emma's relationship to the event. Because Emma has lost by 
Miss Taylor's union, it is a source of mild grieving. We could plausibly 
argue that this summary performs an aesthetic function, blending the 'what' 
and the 'how' into a unity: its brevity conveys a mood which seeks to block 
out an event which has brought 'gentle sorrow'. The emptiness and loss 
which the union between others has brought to Emma are woven together 
to produce the basis for further development of the story. But the mean/ 
ingfulness of that story depends on adopting a particular point of view. 
Point of view is a very important concept in the reading of narrative, 
made central, as we have seen, by the criticism of Percy Lubbock. When 
Lubbock laid down criteria for artistically successful fiction, he conceived it 
in terms of the unity and consistency of perceptual focus: in other words, 
which character sees what, and how that governs the reader's relationship to 
the story. This understanding of point of view will be an important one in 
analysing Emma, and I'll explore it in more depth in the next section, which 
will move beyond the passage we have been analysing to this point. 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Character and point of view in Emma 25 

2.5 Character and point of view in Emma 

Marriages — which legitimate sexual unions and order the transmission of 
property — convey certain connotations in drama and narrative; they are 
rooted in the ancient emplotments of romance and comedy. So a wedding 
that deprives Emma of companionship so early in a narrative creates an 
expectation of restitution, or the completion of Emma by means of another 
union. How is the implied reader's investment in this romantic and comic 
outcome, blended with the theme of individual judgement and authority, 
sustained by characterisation and point of view? It is largely the result of the 
construction of Emma's character and point of view. 

E. M. Forster's influential Aspects of the Novel (1927) was in some sense a 
rejoinder to Lubbock's theory of fictional art. Forster — a novelist himself — 
makes a useful distinction between 'flat' and 'round' characters. Mr Wood/ 
house would be a 'flat' character, statically fixated on his hypochondria and 
domestic comfort; on the other hand, Emma would be a 'round' character, 
manifesting complexity and the potential for development. This is a useful 
distinction up to a point, so long as it does not encourage us to think that 
the property of 'roundness' inheres in particular characters who come to 
dominate a story by sheer force of 'personality'. Rather, 'roundness', or the 
effect of personality and complex selfhood, is something that is generated by 
the structural relations between various components of a narrative discourse, 
and the implied reader's investment in that process of structuration. How 
does this work? 

In one sense, Emma is as predictably flat as Mr Woodhouse in that she 
comes to be associated with a finite number of traits: a drive to make matches 
and a sense of her own infallible powers of judgement. This is evident from 
the primary material for structuring character, the dramatised, mimetic 
discourse comprising Emma's direct speech: '"Everybody said that Mr 
Weston would never marry again . . . Some people even talked of a promise 
to his wife on her death/bed, and others of the son and uncle not letting him 
go. All manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject, but I believed 
none of it"' (p. 43). Although Emma asserts her correctness in emphatic 
terms, the implied reader, reading Emma ironically from the perspective 
established by the narrator, may surmise that the possibility of a death/bed 
promise and intra/family conflict is more than 'solemn nonsense'. Emma is 
further 'rounded' by the rhetorical position adopted by Mr Knightley's 
direct speech in this exchange: Knightley suggests that Emma's 'success' in 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



26 The elements of narrative analysis 

matchmaking is due to lucky guessing rather than 'endeavour'. Mr 
Knightley's speech does two things: first, it provides us with an alternative to 
Emma's perspective; and, second, it creates an expectation of development, 
that Emma will move beyond her own perspective. Knightley, who shares 
the narrator's attitude to authority, expresses the view that Emma will be 
completed when she comes to know the 'worthy employment for a young 
lady's mind' (p. 43). This sense of proper feminine worth is a recurrent topic 
of Mr Knightley's speech about Emma, as we see in Chapter 5, where he 
laments the fact that she consistently fails to follow through an improving 
programme of reading (pp. 65—6). We will return to the topic of literacy 
and appropriate feminine behaviour from a different critical perspective 
towards the end of this chapter. 

The expectations of rounding and completion that are generated around 
the character of Emma are complemented by the fact that readers are 
presented with more varied means than direct speech and others' views of 
her for building a profile of Emma's traits and characteristics. In addition, 
the reader has a special relationship to Emma because of privileged access to 
Emma's 'inner life'. These are established for the reader through verbal 
formulations which register, first, Emma's point of view, and, second, 
Emma's private thoughts. This use of point of view and inner thought is 
quite fundamental to the workings of Jane Austen's narrative. In Wayne 
Booth's study of Emma in The Rhetoric of Fiction, Booth described these 
workings as Jane Austen's 'control of distance'. By this he meant that Jane 
Austen's narrator controls the reader's relationship to Emma's point of view 
on the events of the story very carefully, balancing closeness to and 
involvement in Emma's discourse — her direct speech, inner thoughts and so 
on — with a more distant and objectified assessment of the accuracy and 
validity of Emma's judgements. 20 

For illustration, it is helpful to look closely at the episode in which Emma 
encourages the ingenue Harriet Smith to reject the attentions of Mr Robert 
Martin, a tenant farmer, while simultaneously hatching her plot to match 
Harriet and Mr Elton, the young unmarried clergyman. Emma's point 
of view is established by the narrator in the sentence 'Emma watched her 
[Harriet] through the fluctuations of this speech, and saw no alarming 
symptoms of love' (p. 60). But in becoming aware that we are restricted to 
Emma's point of view, the implied reader is invited to 'peer beyond' the 
limitations of Emma's viewpoint. This is where more recent critics such as 
Genette and Rimmon/Kenan have argued that Booth's own work does not 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Character and point of view in Emma 27 

go far enough, and that a more nuanced concept than point of view is 
required, advocating in its place the concept of focalisation. 21 Focalisation 
distinguishes between who sees (Emma), and who speaks (the narrator). 
Readers can only 'peer beyond' using the words provided by the narrator 
(and/or implied author), and here the word 'fluctuations' helps us to do this: 
it suggests an uncertainty in Harriet's speech, the true significance of which 
Emma fails to appreciate, because its source is Harriet's dilemma in pleasing 
her new, powerful mentor at the expense of rejecting Martin's interest in her. 

The 'blindspots' in acts of focalising centred on Emma are further 
manifest when we are given access to Emma's 'inner thoughts'. As Mr Elton 
praises Emma's portrait of Harriet, Emma's inner voice thinks: 'Yes, good 
man! ... but what has all that to do with taking likenesses? You know 
nothing of drawing. Don't pretend to be in raptures about mine. Save your 
raptures for Harriet's face' (p. 71). Emma's 'inner thoughts' intimate just 
enough of what is going on 'outside' of them for the reader to conclude that 
Mr Elton is attracted to Emma rather than Harriet. In the gap that emerges 
between what Emma sees, thinks and predicts at the level of discourse, and 
what can be glimpsed in the wider context of the unfolding story, the 
implied reader follows a narrative based on a number of dramatic ironies, 
reversals of romance expectations, and the potential for moral trans/ 
formation. 

What are these ironies and reversals? In trying to make a match between 
Harriet and Elton, Emma fails to see that Elton wants Emma herself as a 
wife rather than Harriet. Second, in thinking that Frank Churchill is vying 
for her affections, and fearing that Mr Knightley is falling in love with Jane 
Fairfax, Emma fails to note that Frank and Jane are surreptitiously attached 
to each other (by contrast, Knightley sees this). Finally, in fearing that Mr 
Knightley is falling in love with Harriet, Emma comes to realise that she 
herself loves Mr Knightley. This reversal is brought home to her as a result 
of the picnic at Box Hill (Chapter 43), which represents the crisis and com/ 
pletion of Emma's moral transformation. Emma, playing to her audience 
by making a joke at the expense of the garrulous spinster Miss Bates, is 
castigated by Knightley, the authoritative keeper of the conscience of the 
community. Knightley reminds Emma that her joke was hurtful because 
Miss Bates 'is poor; she has sunk from the comforts she was born to . . . Her 
situation should secure your compassion' (p. 368). This, in terms of values, 
is the biggest reversal of all in a narrative which began with a seeming 
celebration of youth, good looks, cleverness and wealth. The narrator's 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



28 The elements of narrative analysis 

focus on Emma's inner thoughts and feelings here registers the scale of the 
moral earthquake: 'she was vexed beyond what could have been expressed 
— almost beyond what she could conceal. Never had she felt so agitated, 
mortified, grieved, at any circumstance in her life' (p. 369). 

If the implied reader has negotiated the balance between 'closeness' to and 
'distance' from Emma's evaluations in line with the various cues that are 
offered by the narrator and implied author, then the closure, or completion, 
of the story ought to be satisfying. The frustrated expectation of romance is 
satisfied by Emma's marriage to Knightley, whilst the marriage to Knightley 
is permissible because of Emma's own completion, and her having acquired 
a rounded sense of her powers and responsibilities in the community. The 
formal 'pleasure' derived from reading Emma resides in the reader having 
been inside Emma's limited perspective, whilst also being able to see around 
it. I said at the beginning of this formal reading of Emma that the opening 
paragraphs of the novel raise the issue of individual judgement through 
Emma's relationship to her governess, and that the direct speech and inner 
thoughts which construct Emma also present her as a figure who is proud of 
her independence of thought and judgement. In the light of this, the open/ 
ing up of Emma's private judgement to the authoritative view vested in the 
narrator and Knightley could be seen as a triumphant aesthetic integration 
of form (the control of distance through focalisation) and content (a story 
about the dangers of unfettered individual judgement and its correction). 
This is, as I have suggested, pleasurable: but there is also an embedded 
moral, educational dimension to the implied reader's investment. 

2.6 Limitations of the formal approach: social spaces and 
voices in narrative, from free indirect speech to social 
contexts 

This approach to Emma is important because it helps us to read the formal 
properties of narrative in elaborate detail. We become skilled close readers 
if we follow this kind of approach, and that enables us to appreciate the 
complex aesthetic invitations that forms of narrative we call 'literary' offer. 
But a reading of Emma may need to account for more than this. While the 
implied reader of this kind of narrative responds to formal elements and 
relations, we would have to acknowledge that even forms have histories 
which are, at some level, homologous to the power relations at work in 
society. It is important to remember that novels are strongly marked by the 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Limitations of the formal approach 29 

distinguishing discourses of class and gender that operate and discriminate 
in the social world. In the case of Emma, it is Mr Knightley — a higlvborn, 
male landowner — who, by integrating and reforming the relations between 
individual judgement, authority and romantic love, is pivotal to the implied 
reader's aesthetic satisfaction. And it is Emma, a high/status woman of the 
gentry class, who is the object of that reform. In moving beyond the formal 
approach we need to account for the impact that social categories have on 
our interpretation of the forms which construct the 'what' and 'how' of 
narrative. 

For example, when Seymour Chatman discusses things and objects, or 
'what' a narrative is about, in addition to events and characters he includes 
settings (basically, where the story takes place). But setting is not just some 
inert 'background': Chatman wants us to be aware that setting is always 
narrated, which is why he coins the concepts of 'story space' and 'the focus 
of spatial attention'. 22 The latter concept is especially helpful for thinking 
about the mediation of social values. In Emma, the story space is pre 
dominantly the village of Highbury, and the focus of spatial attention is on 
three properties and their owners, all of whom are from the gentry class: 
Hartfield (the Woodhouses), Randalls (the Westons) and Donwell Abbey 
(Knightley). As Chatman remarks, story space is always mediated by 
focalisation (so the question of 'what' is practically inseparable from 
questions of 'how'), and in Emma this provides a helpful way of high/ 
lighting the social discriminations which structure Emma's focus of spatial 
attention. This is where we need to make reference to the Coles, a socially 
ambitious family relatively new to Highbury: they come from a trading 
background and have accumulated wealth which makes them second only 
to the Woodhouses. Yet, they and their property are only conditionally 
admitted into Emma's focus of spatial attention; 'the Coles were very 
respectable in their way, but they ought to be taught that it was not for them 
to arrange the terms on which the superior families would visit them' (pp. 
217-18). 

We should note, however, that the narrative voice puts distance between 
itself and Emma's class'conscious haughtiness. It does this by subtly 
ironising Emma's condescending social attitude to the Coles by using a 
technique, when reflecting on Emma's subsequent visit to the family, that has 
become known as free indirect speech: 'she must have delighted the Coles — 
worthy people, who deserved to be made happy! — and left a name behind 
her that would not soon die away' (p. 239). While Emma is the focaliser it 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



30 The elements of narrative analysis 

is the narrator who speaks, so the character is speaking indirectly rather than 
directly — except, it appears, in the emphatic remark after the slashes 
('worthy people ...'), which is in a markedly different register from the 
narrator's and is clearly Emma's direct and unappealing, self-regarding 
speech. As Rimmon/Kenan remarks, free indirect speech juxtaposes the 
language of the narrator and character and 'can assist the reader in recon/ 
structing ... attitudes towards ... character'. 2 ' 

Rimmon/Kenan interprets such blending and clashing of voices in the 
context of the formal relationship between narrator, character and implied 
reader, and whilst this is a valid starting point, it needs to be located in a 
particular context: that is, discourses about the countryside and social 
relations in southern England in the first decades of the nineteenth century, 
the extra/textual setting for Austen's work, and where Austen resided. In 
The Country and the City (1973), Raymond Williams argues that the formal 
sophistication of Austen's narratives subtly addresses the anxieties about a 
changing social structure in the countryside, brought about by the influx of 
new money derived from trading families (the Coles in Emma), and felt 
keenly among members of Jane Austen's traditional gentry class (of whom 
Emma herself is a representative). 21 

Viewed from this perspective, we may argue that the narrator is imagina/ 
tively rehearsing and resolving inter/class tensions between new, wealthy 
tradespeople and the gentry through subtly ironic narrative devices: in the 
same way as Emma has to learn a more sympathetic attitude to poor spinsters 
like Miss Bates, the implied reader surmises that Emma ought to adopt more 
gracious and generous manners towards the Coles (precisely because Emma 
is their social superior; the narrator does not doubt that). This is a further 
indication that the establishment of norms in a novel is seldom a matter of 
simple assertion, but instead a complex rhetorical activity. Moreover, the 
norms or values that the implied reader is asked to negotiate through reading 
the narrator's account of the relations between heroine, characters and their 
settings are socially specific. 

Social specificity is highlighted in Williams's work on the countryside 
context. This adopts a comparative focus which looks beyond Austen's 
novels about manners, to writers who represented the same countryside 
space and class tensions more explicitly, such as her near contemporary 
William Cobbett, the radical journalist and social observer. Cobbett com/ 
posed non/fictional essays (Rural Rides, 1822—6, published as a work 1830) 
about worsening social conditions in the English countryside, travel 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



What happens in Richardson's Pamela? 31 

narratives which construct a radically different focus of spatial attention — 
farms and villages in decline — and which seeks to persuade its reader of a 
need to reverse the new monetary, fiscal and capitalist system which 
permeates rural society. 25 Williams claims that Cobbett's social observations 
crafted conventions which would come to be used by novelists who sought 
to write about the interaction between different social classes after 1830 (we 
will analyse one such novelist, Charles Dickens, in Chapter 4). 2S Williams's 
cultural criticism asks us to consider the view that novels are forms of 
imaginative narrative which, though enormously important in themselves, 
exist in the presence and on the borders of competing and contrasting 
narratives. 

This is our bridge to a discussion of the novel as an emergent cultural form 
embedded in history and diverse sources of prose narrative and social and 
cultural debate, for the novel is an institution which has been formed out of 
a complex cultural history. It can be argued that the novel has been the 
central developing institution in the long and contested revolution in 
language, literacy and reading that characterises the period since 1780; a 
point evidenced in the interest expressed in the form by the two major 
English schools of social and cultural criticism in the twentieth century, 
F. R. Leavis's Scrutiny movement, and Raymond Williams's cultural 
materialism/ 7 In order to take an early snap-shot of this history in the 
making I will turn to a text that is commonly regarded as being one of the 
first major novels in English, Pamela by Samuel Richardson, which was 
published over seventy years before Emma in 1740. 

2.7 What happens in Richardson's Pamela? 

Turning to Pamela, and comparing it with Emma, we will find a different 
reading experience. Pamela Andrews marries her master, the gentleman 
Mr B.; she is from a lower social class than Emma Woodhouse: she is a 
servant girl. Pamela's low status makes her path to marriage much more 
dangerous and disturbing. Following the death of Pamela's mistress, the 
sexually predatory intentions of the mistress's son towards her are soon 
apparent. After a number of attempted assaults, Mr B. gives way to Pamela's 
protestations in defence of her virtue; she is seemingly allowed to return to 
her parents. Instead, the coach in which she travels is diverted to her master's 
Lincolnshire estate, where she is held as a virtual prisoner by the grotesque 
Mrs Jewkes. In the journal which she begins in the new environment, 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



32 The elements of narrative analysis 

Pamela records her attempt to escape with the aid of Mr Williams, her 
master's clergyman, though this escape is foiled. Mr B. plots a sham marriage 
to entrap Pamela, though Pamela sees through this trick. Mr B. comes to 
respect Pamela's virtue and the pair marry legitimately. In the last phase 
of Richardson's 1740 version the local gentry, embodied in Lady Davers 
(Mr B.'s sister), accept the pair after expressing extreme hostility. 

These are the 'events' of the narrative, so to speak. While I'll point to the 
way in which the critical vocabulary of formalism can highlight narrative 
similarities between Pamela and Emma, I'll also endeavour to explain the 
relationship between Richardson's narrative framework and debates about 
telling the truth in narrative, class, gender and literacy within an expanding 
print culture. This is not a matter of dispensing with formal analysis: rather, 
it is a case of embedding key aspects of it in a social and cultural context. 



2.8 First'person narration and the epistolary form: 
the dramatised narrator, rhetoric and the narratee 

Richardson's Pamela is narrated differently from Emma in so far as Pamela is 
a dramatised, first/person narrator who tells her own story in letters (the 
epistolary form) and a journal. This is the opening of her narration: 

My dear Father and Mother, 

I have great trouble, and some comfort, to acquaint you with. The trouble is, that 
my good lady died of the illness I mentioned to you, and left us all much grieved 
for the loss of her; for she was a dear good lady, and kind to all us her servants. 
Much I feared, that as I was taken by her ladyship to wait upon her person, I 
should be quite destitute again, and forced to return to you and my poor mother, 
who have enough to do to maintain yourselves; and, as my lady's goodness had 
put me to write and cast accompts, and made me a little expert at my needle, and 
otherwise qualified above my degree, it was not every family that could have 
found a place that your poor Pamela was fit for: But God, whose graciousness to 
us we have so often experienced, put it into my good lady's heart, on her death/ 
bed, just an hour before she expired, to recommend to my young master all her 
servants, one by one; and when it came to my turn to be recommended (for I was 
sobbing and crying at her pillow) she could only say, 'My dear son!' and so broke 
off a little; and then recovering, 'Remember my poor Pamela!' And those were 
her last words! O how my eyes overflow! Don't wonder to see the paper so 
blotted! (p. 43) 28 

It is important to recognise that the first paragraph of Pamela's first letter is, 
above all, the opening of an elaborate act of story/telling. Pamela's letter 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



First'person narration and the epistolary form 33 

performs a similar function to the first paragraph of Emma: the chronology 
of Pamela's story (upbringing, employment, training) is embedded in 
Pamela's epistolary discourse. This discourse reveals the central character's 
servant status whilst disclosing something of her origins: allusions to 
destitution and hardship indicate that Pamela comes from a poor but devout 
family. References to the skills she has been required to refine by her kindly 
and enlightened, but now dead, employer — account/keeping ('cast 
accompts'), needlework and, above all, writing — indicate that she has been 
raised somewhat above her station, a factor which imperils Pamela's chances 
of future employment. This sense of reversal is supported by key oppo' 
sitions: 'trouble' and 'comfort' create a tension in the first sentence, rather in 
the way that ideas of independence and authority create a tension in Emma. 
This, taken with the death of Pamela's mistress as the event which initiates 
the narration, generates expectations which will themselves, readers discover 
as they progress, be subject to reversal: what appears a source of comfort 
(Pamela's employment by the new master of the house) becomes a source of 
trouble. 

What is the effect of the first'person epistolary form on reading? The 
terms that I have used in the analysis above point to the difference; in the 
opening paragraph of Pamela matters relating to the story are revealed, 
disclosed, alluded to, indicated: their significance has to be inferred. They 
could be said to be, to call again upon Lubbock's distinction, 'shown' rather 
than 'told'. Following Henry James's late nineteenth/century interest in the 
novel as a form of writing which, through point of view, could show the 
subtle movements and shades of human consciousness, Lubbock thought 
he could see in Richardson's fiction the germ of his own preference for 
narrative that would 'show a mind in action ... [and] give a dramatic 
display of the commotion within a breast'/ 9 A good example of this occurs 
at the end of the first paragraph of Pamela: Pamela's grief at the death of her 
mistress is 'shown' to us in the ink blotted by her tears, an image of intense 
sensibility which apparently closes the gap between Pamela's emotional 
mind, her body, her written words and the reader. 

Except that the gap is not closed, at least not on the basis of the reader's 
being 'shown' this. As we have already established, all narration is telling to 
a greater or lesser degree. 'Showing' the effects of Pamela's tears would 
require someone to sob over the wet ink of every 'Letter I' of the work as it 
rolled off the press. Instead Pamela is telling, or, as the rhetorically aware 
Wayne C. Booth would insist, actively persuading, her reader of the depth 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



34 The elements of narrative analysis 

of her grief. Or, to be more precise still, Pamela, the narrator, addresses and 
seeks to persuade her parents — 'My dear Father and Mother, . . . Don't wonder 
to see the paper so blotted!' The parents may be said to constitute the text's 
narratees, addressees who intercede between the narrator and implied reader. 
The narratee features in Chatman's model of the narrative transaction, yet 
we had no cause to draw on this category when analysing Emma. This 
is because explicit narratees are not obvious in every narrative text. The 
narratee is obvious in Pamela in the sense that someone identifiable — and 
sometimes unidentifiable — is always being narrated to. Narratees are inv 
portant to the rhetorical project that the text is performing for its implied 
reader. 

What sort of a reader is implied, and what is the rhetorical project? The 
title page of the 1801 edition of Pamela retained much of its 'machinery' 
from the first edition of 1740 and is highly explicit in framing what will 
follow, and its reader is initially inscribed rather than implied: 

Pamela; / or, / Virtue Rewarded. / In a / Series of Letters / From a Beautiful 
Young Damsel to Her Parents: / And Afterwards in Her Exalted Condition, / 
Between Her, And Persons of Figure and Quality, / Upon the / Most Important 
and Entertaining Subjects / In Genteel Life / ... Published in Order to 
Cultivate the Principles / Of Virtue and Religion in the Minds of the / Youth 
of Both Sexes, (p. 27) 

The inscribed reader is drawn from 'the Youth of Both Sexes' who are to be 
educated in the principles of virtue and religion. These principles will be 
conveyed through Pamela's letters to her parents, which, additionally, will 
impart knowledge of 'Important' and 'Entertaining' kinds relating to 
'Genteel' society. The ' Truth' and 'Nature' on which these letters are founded 
is guaranteed by the 'Editor' of the volume in a subsequent 'Preface', and it 
is also claimed that 'an Editor can judge with an impartiality which is rarely 
to be found in an Author' because 'his own passions ... have been uncom/ 
monly moved in perusing it' (p. 31). Here, the editor is a self-styled reader 
rather than a writer, who makes claims for the truthfulness of the letters that 
follow precisely because he has read, collated and had his own sensibility 
touched by them. The idea of the power and influence of writing is per/ 
vasive throughout this framework. 

We should pause here for a moment to recall the way in which Emma 
presented itself to its first readers, for the contrast is quite striking. As we saw 
at the beginning of this chapter Emma announces itself simply as 'a novel'. 
Part of what that assumes and implies was what we spent a good deal of 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



The narratee and writing as an 'event' 35 

space analysing, making its implicit framework and machinery explicit 
through the formal analysis of its narrative. In Pamela the machinery and 
framing devices remain explicit, informing the implied reader how power/ 
ful the reading experience will be. Of course, Pamela is still a fiction, and 
Richardson was not an editor but an author more or less making it up. But 
this 'fact' is outside the frame we are considering in the same way as Austen's 
actual authorship was always a mediated concern in our approach to Emma, 
even when we became concerned with questions of her class. This detour 
into the explicit framework of Pamela takes us back to the point about 
Pamela narrating to narratees: those who 'feel' the power of Pamela's letters 
and journals in the story. The following analysis of the narratee will help us 
to link Pamela to cultural contexts and debates about truth and represen/ 
tation in the 1740s; this will in turn lead to a discussion (sections 2.11—14) 
of some of the questions that motivate inquiry into the origins of the novel. 

2.9 The narratee and writing as an 'event' in Pamela 

Pamela alludes to her writing skill in her first letter to her parents, and there/ 
after she writes copiously. Although Richardson thought that in having his 
character 'write to the moment' he was employing a technique which would 
capture the transparent, immediate reality of Pamela's subjectivity, many 
present/day readers find it unconvincing. The fact that Pamela has seem/ 
ingly to spend every available minute — that is to say when she is neither being 
assailed by the libertine Mr B. nor in a swoon — writing about these assaults 
and collapses strains at their tacit assumptions about 'realism' in narrative. 
But there have been many 'realisms' in the modern history of prose narrative, 
as we will see in the chapters to follow. Often, a sense of what is convincing 
or 'real' is conditioned by over/familiarity with the smooth workings of a 
narrative framework such as we find in a novel by Austen. What needs to be 
questioned here is not the veracity of Richardson's text, but a rather rigid 
adherence to certain ways of handling the categories of analysis that have 
been presented to us by the formal tradition. As well as looking at events 
comprising the story which Pamela's epistolary discourse records, we should 
also look at Pamela's acts of writing as events in themselves which act upon 
their narratees. 

Pamela's writings are presented as the source of two major 'conversions' 
in Pamela: Mr B. casts off his libertine ways and comes to honour Pamela's 
virtue, and Lady Davers sets aside her aristocratic pride and comes to accept 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



36 The elements of narrative analysis 

the lowborn Pamela as a legitimate marriage partner for her brother. It is in 
this sense that we have to see Mr B. and Lady Davers as narratees, or figures 
who read Pamela's letters and journal. There are numerous narratees in 
Pamela. Some are intended: Pamela writes for her parents. Some narratees are 
not intended: it is soon clear that Pamela's letters home are being intercepted 
and read by Mr B. Some narratees are confronted with conflicting accounts 
of the same story: when Pamela finds herself in the house of one of Mr B.'s 
tenant farmers (Letter XXXII) en route to Lincolnshire, she attempts to 
persuade her hosts — an audience consisting of the farmer, his wife and a 
daughter — of the truth of her story only to discover that Mr B. has already 
sent a letter containing a conflicting account to them. In this drama played 
out before a number of narratees, Pamela's story of her determination to 
protect her virtue against her master's sexual despotism wins the sympathy 
of the farmer's young daughter, but not the farmer, who remains on the side 
of patriarchy and landed authority. A drama of identification rooted in 
class, gender and generation, but weighted unquestionably towards 
sympathy for Pamela, is as explicit here as the narrative framework is about 
the conclusion that the implied reader should reach. 

When landed authority itself becomes an unintended narratee, in the 
person of Mr B., he is moved to sympathy by Pamela's story: Mr B. tells 
Pamela that his overhearing her 'pretty chit/chat to Mrs Jewkes the last 
Sunday night' — presented to the reader as Pamela in a mode of confessional 
recollection (p. 238) — 'half disarmed my resolution [to rape her], before I 
approached your bed' (p. 251). It is expected then that when Mr B. does 
eventually get to become an authorised reader — Pamela grants him 
permission to read the letters and journals that she has sewn into her 
underclothing for secrecy and protection — he is converted by the story he 
reads, as he relates to Lady Davers: 'she may ... make as great a convert of 
you from pride, as she has of me from libertinism' (p. 443). Having been 
converted by another of Pamela's self-justifying narrations, Lady Davers 
also requests to read Pamela's letters and journals. 

Of course, Pamela reports all of these events and testimonies of affect 
subsequently in either letters or her journal, the very papers that Lady 
Davers desires to read. At key points in the story, we are reminded of the 
massive inventory of writings, and the events and feelings they relate, that 
Pamela has accumulated (p. 316). Indeed, the whole narrative scheme 
requires that we are attentive to the frequency, or number of occasions, upon 
which the same events are renarrated and reread by characters. This aware/ 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Pamela, print culture and debates about genre 37 

ness of frequency is best conceived as a starting point for casting a much 
more productive light on the effects that Pamela's writings have on characters 
such as Mr B. and Lady Davers: in fact, rather than simply 'reporting' 
events, we could say that Pamela's letters and journal entries are events which 
help to determine the outcome of the story that at one level they are only 
supposed to record. Once this way of looking at a formal detail of narration 
— writing as an event which dramatises affect and influence — is acknow 
ledged we can begin to reintegrate Pamela into debates about the role of 
literacy in reconstructing social and cultural authority in the mid eighteenth 
century. 

2.10 Pamela, print culture and debates about genre: the 
familiar letter, criticism and 'the novel' 

Richardson's text became a much/debated publishing phenomenon in the 
1740s, and the interpretation of the character of Pamela, and the rhetorical 
function of her letters, were at the heart of a multi'faceted cultural debate 
about how the truth should be told in prose narrative. Richardson's purpose 
in representing the affective powers of Pamela's writing was didactic. But 
Richardson's didactic intentions were defined by an established but growing 
and internally differentiated 'print culture': that is to say, a growing trade in 
books and other printed matter. In addition to manufacturing editions of 
poetical works and dramatic texts, such as Shakespeare's, reinvented as 
classics which aimed to satisfy 'high' tastes, this print culture also produced 
reading material which aimed to satisfy the needs of new readers from an 
increasingly ambitious 'middling' social rank. These readers sought 
instruction and guidance in taste, civilised modes of behaviour and conduct. 
A self-educated man, Richardson was an exemplary contributor to this 
educative, enlightening domain of print culture in being a printer as well as 
an author. As Richardson himself acknowledged, Pamela was a consider/ 
ably expanded version of two letters exchanged between a father and his 
servant daughter which had featured in a conduct book commissioned by 
booksellers. Organised around advice letters which were designed to 
instruct 'Country Readers' in the approved, urbane ways of putting things 
into words (to 'indite'), Richardson found himself increasingly composing 
the letters to instruct readers in 'how to think and act' as well, using as a basis 
the story of a servant girl which had 'some slight foundation in truth', and 
dramatising her voice and story through an imitation of the so/called 
familiar letter. 30 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



38 The elements of narrative analysis 

One of the first novels thus came into being through Richardson's use of 
the familiar letter, an eighteenth/century prose genre. The most regular way 
of talking about the familiar letter at the time when Richardson was writing 
stressed its intimacy, and the way in which it granted access to the 'heart' of 
the person. This is certainly the way in which Richardson conceived of the 
familiar letter in Pamela: it was a window to her virtuous sincerity, and 
Pamela spoke the generic language of the familiar letter — of spontaneity, 
transparency of motive and truth — to assert as much. Richardson's view of 
the character he had created through his narrative method held that her 
virtue and integrity were transparently self-evident and truthful." 

Truth claims made in respect of the self-presentation of character in the 
familiar letter were scrutinsed and debated publicly in eighteenth/century 
print culture. As Thomas Keymer points out, the eighteenth/century critic 
Samuel Johnson was alert to the possibility that familiar letters were less 
transparent than they seemed: that is to say, they were addressed to a particu/ 
lar person, sought to effect a purpose, and thus constituted a rhetorical act of 
self-dramatisation to that end. Johnson formulated this rhetorical sense of 
the letter in his commentary on the artful letters of the poet Alexander Pope 
(written in the 1730s), which appeared in Johnson's biography of Pope 
(1781), another prose narrative genre (the characteristics of which we will 
examine in more detail in the next chapter). 32 

Johnson's sceptical reading of the familiar letter needs to be added to 
a discussion of Pamela's letters as events which effect the conversion of 
narratees such as Mr. B. and Lady Davers. For it provides grounds for an 
alternative reading of Pamela's performance in the genre. Indeed, such a 
reading was satirically aired in a debate conducted through the culture of 
print. Henry Fielding read Pamela's character sceptically when he wrote 
(anonymously) a parodic burlesque of Richardson's narrative framework 
entitled Shamela (1741). As the title implies, Fielding's narrative uses letters 
and journals to reveal a servant girl hypocritically manipulating her master's 
sexual desire for her in order to secure a marriage and social advantage (here 
'writing to the moment' includes writing in bed with the man alongside). 
We need to be alert here to the way in which anxieties about class, gender 
and the power of literacy are implicit in Fielding's parody. In Richardson's 
narrative, letters determine as well as record a story in which a servant girl 
morally reforms a man of the gentry class, marrying him and thus rising in 
the social scale to his station. Literacy — Pamela's capacity to fashion an 
image of herself in narrative — is an agent in this process. Fielding's satire 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Pamela, print culture and debates about genre 39 

contests the moral legitimacy of Pamela's story and character, as well as 
asking questions about Richardson's narrative method, which placed no 
'check' on his character's subjectivism. Fielding was using fiction to explore 
the question: how does one tell the truth in narrative? 

Fielding pursued this question further in 1742 when he wrote Joseph 
Andrews, based on the ruse that Richardson's Pamela Andrews has a 
brother, Joseph, a footman who is equally determined to protect his virtue, 
this time against Lady Booby, a relative of Pamela's Mr B. Thus, Fielding 
contests Richardson's reading of gendered power relations in making Joseph 
the victim of a woman's sexual predatoriness. Fielding also contests 
Richardson's narrative of class elevation in the sense that the virtuous Joseph 
Andrews turns out not to be low born, but is instead the child of a gentle/ 
man, switched by gypsies at birth. 

In a preface to the work, Fielding attempted to categorise the form of 
writing that the reader would encounter. He calls it 'a comic epic/poem in 
prose'. In naming and practising this 'species' of writing, Fielding addressed 
an implied reader who was familiar with the gentlemanly study of classical 
literature and its schemes of generic classification. Fielding distinguished 
his production from the romance, the dominant form of European prose 
narrative in the seventeenth century: a courtly genre set conventionally in the 
distant past, concerning questing knights and their encounters with such 
fabulous entities as dragons and giants. In contrast to the aristocratic 
romance, Fielding's new species of writing was low and comic, representing 
'persons of inferior rank'. In classifying his writing as an 'epic/poem in 
prose', Fielding was describing a form of non/metrical narration which 
could authoritatively frame, embed and comment upon the elements of 
narrative with which we are now familiar, namely 'action, characters . . . and 
diction'." The classical story/telling techniques of epic are brought to the 
lowlife subject matter of prose." Fielding makes the narrator of Joseph 
Andrews tell Joseph's story in the third person. In other words, the narrative 
voice is as authoritative as the one which we have seen at work in the later 
Emma; though Fielding's narrator is much more obtrusive, and confides in 
the reader through a first/person address. Modern readers, with the benefit of 
hindsight, have little trouble in recognising Fielding's 'comic epic/poem in 
prose' as a novel. In the course of this discussion of the intertextual relations 
that define its position in a debate, I have presented it as an instance of a 
'genre in the process of coming into being' as Michael McKeon describes 
the origins of the novel in English. 35 Let us now move to a more theoretical 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



40 The elements of narrative analysis 

style of discussion to consider some of the major positions in the debate 
surrounding this phenomenon, before reconsidering Emma in the light of the 
questions posed in this debate. 

2.11 The debate about the origins of the novel 

In looking at the novel as a 'genre in the process of coming into being' 
literary historians are confronted by, in the words of J. Paul Hunter, 
'something unfocused, sprawling across genres and modes more or less 
indiscriminately'.' 6 Although it is commonly agreed that Pamela and Joseph 
Andrews occupy quite an advanced and mature position in the process and 
were more 'codified' or organised experiments, we can still see their generic 
heterogeneity quite explicitly in their narrative frameworks.' 7 As we have 
seen, Pamela was made from the familiar letter, the journal and the conduct 
book. But it also borrowed from a tradition of Protestant narratives record/ 
ing personal trials and spiritual self-scrutiny, which were often adapted from 
journals and diaries.' 8 1 am resisting the term 'autobiography' at present for 
reasons which will be explained in the next chapter, where we will look 
more closely at the naming of self-writing as 'autobiography' in its nine/ 
teentlvcentury context. Even so, it is clear that many of the prose genres over 
which these early novels 'sprawl' provide opportunities for representing the 
'inwardness' of character. 

There is an associated rhetoric of 'truth' at work in the narrative frame/ 
works of Pamela and Joseph Andrews which makes them similar. We have 
seen that Richardson, in claiming the existence of an organising editor who 
has collated his character's letters and journals, and in so doing has dis/ 
covered the truthfulness of the narrative they comprise, at least leaves open 
the possibility that the reader is reading 'real' history rather than a fiction. 
Joseph Andrews refers to itself as a 'true History' (Book 4, Chapter 16). 
Consequently there are similarities between these writings and the slightly 
earlier narratives by Daniel Defoe such as Robinson Crusoe (1719) and Moll 
Flanders (1722). Again, Defoe's narratives are generically heterogeneous, 
drawing variously upon the scientific travel journal, the criminal biography, 
and the confessional narrative of the penitent. His texts are also framed by 
complex editorial statements which position these narratives ambiguously 
between 'real' histories and fiction. 

How have critics and literary historians sought to explain the differences 
between Richardson and Fielding, and the distinctive similarities that 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



The rise of the novel 41 

characterise the narratives of Defoe, Richardson and Fielding? This is where 
we need to look at accounts of the rise of the novel, where identifications 
of the point of origin are as varied as the formalists' arguments over the 
vocabulary of narrative criticism." Perhaps it is most appropriate to say that 
the novel has come into being from multiple points of origin, culturally, 
linguistically, geographically, historically (a point I will return to in section 
5.6). It is as well to be aware of this when focusing on the stories of origins 
at work in a given culture — in our case, a culture defined by English/ 
language writing and speech. This in itself is complex enough: as the 
following accounts will show, cultures are sites of conflict and contestation 
which prose narratives internalise in the very process of making the form 
that has come to be recognised as 'the novel'. 

2.12 The rise of the novel: Ian Watt and the tradition of 
formal realism 

One of the most powerful and enduring accounts of the origins of the novel 
in English is Ian Watt's influential study The Rise of the Novel (1957). Watt 
argues that the English novel came into being in the eighteenth century 
and that Daniel Defoe, Samuel Richardson and, to a lesser extent, Henry 
Fielding were the significant innovators. According to Watt, Defoe and 
Richardson crafted prose narratives which absorbed 'the general temper of 
philosophical realism'. 40 'Philosophical realism' was constituted principally 
in the empirical philosophy of John Locke, the seventeenth/century philos' 
opher who held that the associations and ideas that enable thought and the 
discovery of truth are apprehended by the individual's senses; a philosophy 
cal position known as empiricism. According to Watt, this had a profound 
impact on the writing of prose narrative. Archaic narrative types such as 
the romance, with their elaborate diction, distant/past settings and fantastic 
happenings, were abandoned in favour of story lines which were set in the 
present or recent past, and were more spontaneous and inventive in the way 
that they represented, in plain prose, the practical and plausible situations 
that individuals confronted in their everyday lives. 

The expanding eighteenth/century print culture served a growing reading 
public which was generated by a changing social structure. Accordingly 
Watt's thesis has a sociological dimension in that he linked the emergence of 
narratives about individuals to the rise of economic individualism. Daniel 
Defoe is a crucial figure, in that his narratives forge links between the 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



42 The elements of narrative analysis 

individualist ethics of Protestant theologies and the forms of competitive, 
individualist, economic activity which came increasingly to structure every/ 
day life.'" It is in this sense that Watt presents Robinson Crusoe as a founding 
moment in the rise of the novel. Defoe's narrative, in which the narrator 
recalls his God/guided struggle to bring the island on which he has been 
shipwrecked under his mastery, appealed to a growing commercial middle 
class, for whom Crusoe's battle with his circumstances constituted an exotic 
refraction of their own struggle with a new, competitive, capitalist world. 42 

Such narratives made individual perception of a material world their 
organising principle. First/person narration was a feature of Defoe's 
Robinson Crusoe and Moll Flanders, and as we have seen, it is Richardson's 
choice in Pamela. Watt notes how this first/person perspective is made more 
palpable by the presence of Pamela's elaborate descriptions of domestic 
detail." For Watt, narration which emphasises perception, the everyday 
world perceived, and the psychological movements of mind in the act of 
making sense of the world are at the basis of what he describes as 'realism of 
presentation'. Realism of presentation is, in turn, the cornerstone of Watt's 
construction of a tradition of narrative which initiates and propels the 'rise 
of the novel'. He calls this 'formal realism', which acknowledges the formal, 
conventional nature of a new way of mediating a middle/class world view, 
founded on the primacy of the individual. 

Watt's argument can be used to think about the status of much earlier 
popular prose narratives. Let us take Thomas Deloney's Jack of Newbury 
(1597) as an example. Jack of Newbury was a story set during the reign of 
Henry VIII, which, from the perspective of its late sixteenth/century reader/ 
ship, was relatively contemporaneous. Jack is a sober and industrious cloth/ 
worker who marries his recently widowed employer/mistress: there are 
anticipations of Pamela and virtue being rewarded. The narrative recounts, 
in a plain style, Jack's business success, his obedience and usefulness to the 
king (he assembles a troop of men to fight the battle of Flodden Field), and 
the social recognition increasingly bestowed on him. This culminates in the 
visit of the royal household to a banquet at Jack's home. Although royalty 
makes an appearance, the focus is on labour and the everyday existence of 
common people. Yet, Watt's theory of 'formal realism', and the emphasis 
it places on conventions for representing complex individuality, leads us to 
recognise the differences between Deloney's narrative and the later narratives 
of Defoe and Richardson. In Jack of Newbury, the eponymous figure 
represents little more than an allegorical substitute for the virtues of 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Contested fields of cultural discourse 43 

paternalism, benevolence and loyalty, providing a point of continuity 
between the various episodes, as opposed to a character like Robinson 
Crusoe, who is individualised through first/person narration. 44 In spite of 
some novelistic qualities, Jack of Newbury does not fit into Watt's tradition, 
strengthening his claim about the foundation of that tradition in the 
eighteenth century. 

The difficulty for Watt, however, is that at the very moment that he posits 
the emergence of this tradition, he is confronted by an example from the mid 
eighteenth century which does not quite fit: Fielding's novels, as we have 
seen, reject the subjective narrative method preferred by Richardson. Watt 
accordingly adjusts and expands his theory of formal realism by dis' 
tinguishing between 'realism of presentation' and 'realism of assessment', 
evident in Fielding's third/person narration which 'assesses' characters and 
events 'objectively'. By this means, Watt is able to assimilate Fielding into the 
tradition of formal realism, especially when he argues for the developmental 
role played by the later writings of Jane Austen, which combined 'into a 
harmonious unity the advantages both of realism of presentation and 
realism of assessment'. 4 ' This certainly accords with the formalist reading of 
Emma developed in section 2.5, where we noted the way in which the 
narration moved between Emma's limited focalisation and the narrator's 
more 'objective' overview. However, the difficulty with Watt's solution is 
that, even though he begins with a social and cultural focus, he concludes 
by viewing the development of the novel as a sequential, problem/solving 
activity concerned with form, in the sense that Richardson and Fielding 
between them generate a problem which Austen comes along later and 
solves, thus getting herself elected to the tradition. This view is in danger of 
losing sight of questions of social and cultural context, and of allowing a 
teleology (reading the end back into the beginning and regarding progress 
to that end as inevitable) defined by formal questions to take over. 

2.13 Contested fields of cultural discourse and the rise of 
the novel: Lennard J. Davis and Michael McKeon 

More recently Lennard J. Davis's Factual Fictions: The Origins of the English 
Novel (1983) has noted the problem of teleology in approaches which 
become centred on constructions of continuous traditions. In response, 
Davis constructs a history of the novel which is concerned to stress breaks, 
discontinuities and the thresholds which separate the fields of discourse 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Page 



44 The elements of narrative analysis 

comprising 'culture'. Accordingly, he resists explaining the rise of the novel 
as a consequence of the decline of the courtly romance: for Davis, novel and 
romance were radically different genres.* Having made this break, Davis 
argues that the origins of the English novel can be located instead in a 
seventeenth/century culture of 'prose narrative in print', which included 
printed news ballads, the forerunners of newspapers. This produced what 
Davis describes as a 'news/novel discourse', an unstable blend of factual and 
fictional narrative. 47 This helps to explain not only the generic mixture that 
we find in novels by Defoe, Richardson and Fielding, but also the sense of 
ambiguity that we encounter when these fictional texts refer to themselves as 
'true histories'. Davis sees the ambiguities around the 'truth' status of early 
fiction as a consequence of its emergence from a complex field of discourse. 

Michael McKeon in The Origins of the English Not/el (1987) also locates 
the problem of the early novel's preoccupation with 'truth' within fields of 
discourse. McKeon pushes the origins of the English novel back into the 
early modern period (the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries), arguing that 
the writings of Defoe, Richardson and Fielding mark the culminating point 
of, and are in a sense produced by, a history of social conflict during which 
epistemological categories such as 'truth', and moral categories such as 
'virtue', were refined and debated within and between fields of phikv 
sophical, scientific, theological and political discourse. For McKeon class 
relations and conflicts drove this process, and changing forms of prose 
narrative internalised the contests that were being waged. The 'literary' form 
which has come to be recognised as the novel internalised these contests in 
special ways: McKeon argues that 'the distinctive feature of novelistic narra/ 
tive is the internalisation or thematisation of formal problems on the level of 
content . 

How did this work? We have already seen how, from the perspective 
of Ian Watt, the late Elizabethan Jack of Newbury does not belong to the 
tradition of the 'formal realist' novel. McKeon's approach does not set aside 
the need for traditions; instead it broadens the focus by reconstructing a 
multiplicity of narrative (and non/narrative) traditions, and traces the dia/ 
lectical interactions and conflicts that produced the novel. McKeon places 
Deloney's narrative in the context of a tradition of early modern stories 
about virtue which exalted the qualities of a particular class, in this case 
tradesmen. We noted how, given its theme of the virtuous figure who is 
rewarded with increased social recognition, Jack of Newbury seems to 
anticipate Pamela. 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Gender and the rise of the novel 45 

Yet, this is to admit a teleology which McKeon's approach resists. For 
McKeon, Pamela as a narrative that we have come to recognise as a novel was 
produced when the story about virtue came under subsequent intellectual 
pressure to tell itself 'truthfully' in a formally self-conscious manner, and 
to internalise that truth at the level of content (Mr B.'s 'conversion'). 1 ' 
According to McKeon, the question of how to tell the truth in narrative 
had, by the mid eighteenth century, come to be contested by middle/class 
and aristocratic world views which placed themselves, respectively, at the 
opposite ends of two epistemological poles: naive empiricism and extreme 
scepticism. Richardson's choice of the familiar letter, and his claims for the 
'truth' of Pamela's virtuous sentiments that it transparently represented, can 
trace its antecedents to a middle/class preference for the philosophy of naive 
empiricism. In turn, such naively empirical stories concerned with virtue 
were contested by an extreme form of conservative scepticism, evidenced 
in the 1740s as we have seen in Henry Fielding's parodic Shamela, and 
then more positively in his Joseph Andrews. Thus, McKeon presents an his/ 
torical and theoretical interpretation of the social and discursive sources of 
the debate between Richardson and Fielding which we traced in section 
2.10. 

A consequence of this manner of tracing the debate is that it is difficult 
for us to read the novels of Richardson and Fielding without thinking of 
intertextual connections: not only between one fictional text and another, 
but also between fictional and non/fictional prose narratives and discourses. 
Moreover, fictional characters and the effects of 'realism' were not simply 
the artistic inventions of individual writers, but were produced out of em/ 
battled fields of discourse. This excursion into debates about the origin of 
the novel has the potential to alter radically the questions we ask when we 
read novels and prose narratives. Let us begin to return to Emma in the light 
of this new way of reading, approaching it by way of Nancy Armstrong's 
poststructuralist feminist thesis about the origins of the novel and its political 
role in constructing gendered subjectivity. 



2.14 Gender and the rise of the novel: the domestic woman 
and the production of subjectivities 

To what extent have critics recognised gendered discourses in their re/ 
construction of the early modern cultural conflicts from which the novel 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



46 The elements of narrative analysis 

emerged? For the most part, their role has been investigated by feminist 
critics. An important strand of feminist literary criticism aims to recover for 
women a central place in literary history and to construct a tradition which 
challenges a male'dominated canon. 

Alternatively, feminist critics such as Ros Ballaster and Nancy Armstrong 
adopt aproaches which are less author/ and work/centred, focusing instead 
on the cultural prevalence and power of discourses of gender and sexual 
desire." For Nancy Armstrong, this introduces a different orientation to the 
history of the novel; as she argues in Desire and Domestic Fiction (1987), 
Defoe's Robinson Crusoe 'does not inaugurate the tradition of the novel as we 
know it', for the novel as we know it is preoccupied with relationships 
between men and women. 52 Whilst they are durable, desert/island stories 
have not proved to be as reproducible as stories about sexual desire. 
Romantic novels about men, women and sexual desire had to be told again 
and again in different ways, according to Armstrong, because they were at 
the root of an English political settlement which 'was accomplished largely 
through cultural hegemony'." 

What is meant by this? Armstrong's thesis about the rise of the novel as a 
cultural institution with important political consequences is alert to the 
contexts of early modern social conflict that McKeon's approach highlights. 
In common with Davis and McKeon, Armstrong's method is intertextual, 
or a 'foray into extraliterary territory as part of an effort to suggest how fiction 
might have worked with other, very different forms of writing to produce a 
new form of political power'. 51 In other words, the novel emerged out of a 
variety of narrative and non/narrative sources to become a cultural insti' 
tution which absorbed and transformed the dangerous conflicts of society 
and politics into the microcosmic domestic world, the social and political 
conflicts being rewritten along lines of gender division. For Armstrong, the 
fact that Pamela is about a servant girl who marries the gentleman whose 
initial aim is her sexual conquest — a lowborn expert in the domestic arts 
who converts a higlvborn gentleman from libertinism to romantic love and 
domestic responsibility — makes it politically charged. Armstrong argues 
that representations of the domestic woman had come, by the early eiglv 
teenth century, to exercise a considerable degree of power: the domestic 
woman and the space of the household were seemingly above the social 
conflicts generated by the religious and political controversies which had 
dominated the seventeenth century. The domestic woman was a role which 
became familiar to all literate classes through conduct books for women 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



Gender and the rise of the novel 47 

which codified gender differences (the different roles played by men and 
women) and appropriate modes of behaviour. Armstrong argues that these 
provided literate classes with 'a figure of female subjectivity, a grammar ... 
[which] awaited the substance that the novel and its readers ... would 
eventually provide'." 

At issue here is the production of selves in and through forms of discourse 
and reading. Armstrong works from the poststructuralist position, which 
argues that individuals acquire subjectivities which are constructed from 
discourse: in other words female subjectivities were fashioned from reading 
positions, which were inscribed in certain texts and discourses. Conduct 
books provided the woman reader with a model of subjectivity based on 
domestic propriety, which could refashion the woman reader into the 
domestic subject of male desire. Reading experiences such as Pamela utilised 
the basic 'grammar' of a conduct book — its culturally hegemonic figure of 
the domestic woman — whilst making it into a dramatic narrative which was 
both exciting and improving. Armstrong proposes that the novel reader was 
created as a political subject whilst reading a novel. This is, as we saw at the 
very beginning of this chapter, the basic premise behind the idea of the 
implied reader: we have to adjust our subject position when we enter into 
another world of narrative discourse. But Armstrong's argument is more 
historically and critically pointed than this: she asks us to see novel reading 
as a practice which developed in history, and out of a variety of sources 
which had political implications. Her argument asks us to think about why 
some reading positions have become more powerful than others in their 
capacity for forming and sustaining subjectivities. According to Arm/ 
strong, Pamela initiates a very powerful tradition in the English novel, not 
least in the way that it is about the production of a self through the 
possession of literacy. 

Armstrong's reading of domestic ideology in Pamela stresses its place 
in the production of Pamela's self and the conversion of others. Pamela's 
virtue is based on her sensibility and the values of domestic propriety. But 
the innate virtue of Pamela's self has been, as we have seen, questioned by 
some readers (such as Fielding) on the basis of Richardson's chosen narra/ 
tive method. Armstrong reads this positively: she argues that Pamela's self 
is actually a rhetorically performed subjectivity constructed out of writing 
skills. Indeed, Pamela's only weapon in her struggle with Mr B. is her 
written self. It is a self which Mr B. desires to read; and, as we noted in 
section 2.9, it is a self which converts Mr B.'s wayward masculinity to the 



02 pages 001-172 29/1/03 17:27 Pag 



48 The elements of narrative analysis 

domestic ideal once he has read it, a testimony to the power of the domestic 
ideal and its inscription in discourse. 



2.15 Re-reading Emma: letters, standards and intertextual 
allusion 

To what extent can Armstrong's thesis be used to read Emma as a narra/ 
tive? Or, to broaden the question: does our excursion into historical and 
theoretical readings of the origins of the English novel offer any openings for 
the rereading of Emma'. As we noted in the first part of this chapter, a formal 
reading noted the artistic integration of content and form in Austen's narra/ 
tive. The kind of approach adopted by Davis, McKeon and Armstrong 
disintegrates narrative into its social and cultural sources and contexts in 
order to understand its integretative power. Such an approach may be 
appropriate for 'early' novels which were characterised by seemingly clumsy 
frameworks, and which had no settled generic identity to speak of, but surely 
not for Emma, given its manifest artistic wholeness? 

There are two points that we can advance to answer this; both come from 
Michael McKeon. First, we have seen how McKeon's approach to the emer/ 
gence of the novel notes the way in which the novel is distinguished by the 
way in which content is internalised in the form of the narrative, a finding 
with which formalist approaches would be comfortable. But McKeon's 
thesis suggests that this characteristic is actually a product of historical 
dialectics. In other words, there is every reason to expect ourselves to be able 
to read culture and history in the content and formal arrangements of all 
novels. Secondly, McKeon notes that whilst it is true that early novels such 
as Pamela debate their cultural purpose and epistemological bearings 
through overt frameworks, or 'in the interstices of narrative itself, by 
Austen's time these explicit debates had been relocated to the periodical 
presses and into the discourses of 'fiction criticism' (of which more will be 
said in the next chapter)." The cultural function of the novel had not, 
however, changed. 

Consequently, as Armstrong argues, Emma is a story about the refor/ 
mation of subjectivity which draws upon the discourse of the domestic 
ideal. We noted in section 2.5 how Knightley wished for Emma to find 
'worthy employment for a young lady's mind' (p. 43) and how in Chapter 5 
he laments the fact that she consistently fails to follow through an improving 
programme of reading (pp. 65—6). The cultivation of domestic subjectivity